غزل - تيري متاع حيات، علم و ہنر کا سرور
*
تيري متاع حيات، علم و ہنر کا سرور
!ميري متاع حيات ايک دل ناصبور
معجزہ اہل فکر، فلسفہء پيچ پيچ
معجزہ اہل ذکر، موسي و فرعون و طور
مصلحتاً کہہ ديا ميں نے مسلماں تجھے
تيرے نفس ميں نہيں، گرمي يوم النشور
ايک زمانے سے ہے چاک گريباں مرا
تو ہے ابھي ہوش ميں، ميرے جنوں کا قصور
فيض نظر کے ليے ضبط سخن چاہيے
حرف پريشاں نہ کہہ اہل نظر کے حضور
خوار جہاں ميں کبھي ہو نہيں سکتي وہ قوم
عشق ہو جس کا جسور ، فقر ہو جس کا غيور
*
GHAZAL
*

*
A restless aching heart that throbs with Love, Is my lifeʹs only stock and hoard.
Your joys of life consist of wealth and gold, That worldly Science and Arts to you afford.

The marvel wrought by thinkers wise and sage, Consists of problems stiff that thought provoke:
Mount Sinai, Pharoahʹs rout and Mosesʹ Staff, Are miracles worked by those who God invoke.

I have conferred a Muslimʹs name on you, For sake of courtesy, custom and routine:
Though your breath is quite bereft of heat, Of Reckoning Day that shall emit blazing sheen.

My vest is torn to shreds and pieces since long, And this is due to my mindʹs frenzy great:
Your mind is still intact and sound, Wherefore impute the blame to me and slate?

You ought to keep your words within control, If you seek the bounteous glance of guide:
When you talk with those who insight own, Be courteous much, by conduct nice abide.

That nation cannot come to shame at all, Nor shall eʹer come across or face disgrace,
Whose youth are blessed with pluck and courage great, And guard with zeal the prestige of their race.
*

*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/zarb/audio/01-48.mp3
*


Teri Mata-e-Hayat Ilm-o-Hunar Ka Suroor
Meri Mata-e-Hayat Aik Dil-e-Nasaboor!

Moujaza-e-Ahl-e-Fikar, Falsafa-e-Paich Paich
Moujaza-e-Ahl-e-Zikr, Musa(A.S.) -o-Firoun-o-Toor

Muslahatan Keh Diya Main Ne Musalman Tujhe
Tere Nafs Mein Nahi, Garmi-e-Youm-Ul-Nashoor

Aik Zamane Se Hai Chaak Gireban Mera
Tu Hai Abhi Hosh Mein, Mere Junoon Ka Qasoor!

Faiz-e-Nazar Ke Liye Zabt-e-Sukhan Chahiye
Harf-e-Preshan Na Keh Ahl-e-Nazar Ke Huzoor

Khawar Jahan Mein Kabhi Ho Nahin Sakti Woh Qoum
Ishq Ho Jis Ka Jasoor, Faqr Ho Jis Ka Ghayoor
*
