خفتگان خاک سے استفسار
*
مہر روشن چھپ گيا ، اٹھي نقاب روئے شام
شانہ ہستي پہ ہے بکھرا ہوا گيسوئے شام
يہ سيہ پوشي کي تياري کس کے غم ميں ہے
محفل قدرت مگر خورشيد کے ماتم ميں ہے
کر رہا ہے آسماں جادو لب گفتار پر
ساحر شب کي نظر ہے ديدہ بيدار پر
غوطہ زن درياے خاموشي ميں ہے موج ہوا
ہاں ، مگر اک دور سے آتي ہے آواز درا
دل کہ ہے بے تابي الفت ميں دنيا سے نفور
کھنچ لايا ہے مجھے ہنگامہ عالم سے دور
منظر حرماں نصيبي کا تماشائي ہوں ميں
ہم نشين خفتگان کنج تنہائي ہوں ميں
تھم ذرا بے تابي دل! بيٹھ جانے دے مجھے
اور اس بستي پہ چار آ نسو گرانے دے مجھے
اے مے غفلت کے سر مستو ، کہاں رہتے ہو تم
کچھ کہو اس ديس کي آ خر ، جہاں رہتے ہو تم
وہ بھي حيرت خانہ امروز و فردا ہے کوئي؟
اور پيکار عناصر کا تماشا ہے کوئي؟
آدمي واں بھي حصار غم ميں ہے محصور کيا؟
اس ولا يت ميں بھي ہے انساں کا دل مجبور کيا؟
واں بھي جل مرتا ہے سوز شمع پر پروانہ کيا؟
اس چمن ميں بھي گل و بلبل کا ہے افسانہ کيا؟
ياں تو اک مصرع ميں پہلو سے نکل جاتا ہے دل
شعر کي گر مي سے کيا واں بھي پگل جاتاہے دل؟
رشتہ و پيوند ياں کے جان کا آزار ہيں
اس گلستاں ميں بھي کيا ايسے نکيلے خار ہيں؟
اس جہاں ميں اک معيشت اور سو افتاد ہے
روح کيا اس ديس ميں اس فکر سے آزاد ہے؟
کيا وہاں بجلي بھي ہے ، دہقاں بھي ہے ، خرمن بھي ہے؟
قافلے والے بھي ہيں ، انديشہ رہزن بھي ہے؟
تنکے چنتے ہيں و ہاں بھي آ شياں کے واسطے؟
خشت و گل کي فکر ہوتي ہے مکاں کے واسطے؟
واں بھي انساں اپني اصليت سے بيگانے ہيں کيا؟
امتياز ملت و آئيں کے ديوانے ہيں کيا؟
واں بھي کيا فرياد بلبل پر چمن روتا نہيں؟
اس جہاں کي طرح واں بھي درد دل ہوتا نہيں؟
باغ ہے فردوس يا اک منزل آرام ہے؟
يا رخ بے پردہ حسن ازل کا نام ہے؟
کيا جہنم معصيت سوزي کي اک ترکيب ہے؟
آگ کے شعلوں ميں پنہاں مقصد تاويب ہے؟
کيا عوض رفتار کے اس ديس ميں پرواز ہے؟
موت کہتے ہيں جسے اہل زميں ، کيا راز ہے ؟
اضطراب دل کا ساماں ياں کي ہست و بود ہے
علم انساں اس ولايت ميں بھي کيا محدود ہے؟
ديد سے تسکين پاتا ہے دل مہجور بھي؟
'لن تراني' کہہ رہے ہيں يا وہاں کے طور بھي؟
جستجو ميں ہے وہاں بھي روح کو آرام کيا؟
واں بھي انساں ہے قتيل ذوق استفہام کيا؟
آہ! وہ کشور بھي تاريکي سے کيا معمور ہے؟
يا محبت کي تجلي سے سراپا نور ہے؟
تم بتا دو راز جو اس گنبد گرداں ميں ہے
موت اک چبھتا ہوا کانٹا دل انساں ميں ہے
*
THE INTERROGATION OF THE DEAD
*
'Allamah Iqbal has adopted the didactical style in this poem, in a form which is known as "Istifsar-i-Inkara" in Urdu. This is a form of interrogation in which the reply is expected to be in the negative. The limitations and evils of the life in the terrestrial world and its comparison with the life of the unseen spiritual celestial world are presented in question form. Each verse, starting with verse 8, has one or more questions as well as the veiled answer in the negative, except verses 19, 20, and 25. In these three verses the veiled answer in the second hemistich is in the affirmative. The central message of the poem is that life in the unseen celestial world is on a pedestal so different from the pedestal of the terrestrial world's life, with which we are familiar, that the human Intellect has not been able to solve its enigmas. Only Divine Guidance through the Holy Qur’an can unravel it’s realities.
*
The bright sun is hidden, the night shows its face
The night's hair is spread on shoulders of the earth

This black dress is preparation for some one's mourning
Perhaps the Nature's assemblage for the sun is mourning

The sky is casting a spell over the talking lip
The night's magician is watching the awakened eye

The wind current is submerged in the river of silence
However, the tolling bell's sound comes from the distance

Heart which in love's turmoil is evading the world
Has dragged me here far from the maddening crowd

I am the spectator of the spectacle of disappointments
I am the associate of those sleeping in solitude's corner

O My restlessness! Wait and let me rest awhile
And let me shed a few tears at this habitation

O those steeped in a swoon, "Where are you?
Tell me something of the land where you live

Is that world also one of prevarication?
Is that world also one of denizens' struggle?

Is Man engulfed by sorrow in that land also?
Is Man's heart suppressed and helpless in that land also?

Does the moth burn itself in candle's love in that land also?
Does the tale of flower and nightingale exist in that garden also?

In this world a single hemistich perturbs the heart
Does there also the warmth of verse soften the heart?

This world's relations and alliances life's woes are
Are similar sharp thorns present in that garden also?

The daily bread and a million calamities this world has
Does the soul freedom from anxieties in that world has?

Are the thunder, the farmer, the harvest there also?
Are the caravan and the robber's fear there also?

Do birds collect bits of straw for nests there also?
Is the search for bricks and clay for house there also?

Are the humans unaware of their reality there also? $1
Are they after nations' and customs' discrimination there also

Does garden not cry at the nightingale's wail there also?
Like this world is there no sympathy in that world also?

Does the Paradise a garden or a restful mansion constitute?
Or does the Eternal Beauty's Unveiled Face it constitute ? $2

Does hell a method of burning away sins constitute?
Or it in flames of fire a way of discipline constitute?

Has walking given way to speedy flying in that world?
What is the secret of what is called death by denizens of this world?

Life eases the heart's restlessness in this world
Is human knowledge also restricted in that world?

Does the separated heart get satisfaction by sight there also?
Are "Lan Tarana" saying the turs of that land also $3

Does the soul get solace in longing there also?
Is man a victim of desire to learn there also ? $4

Ah! Is that land also filled with darkness?
Or with Love's light is completely illuminated?

Tell us what the secret under this rotating dome $5 is
Death a pricking sharp thorn in the human breast is
*
1. Man in this world does not fully comprehend the significance of the Islamic concept of "Tawhad-i-Insaniyat" (The Unity of Mankind) as enunciated in the Holy Qur’an 49:13 and is busy in maximizing the material benefits for himself, his tribe or his country and not for mankind. This has resulted in the Western concept of nationalism whose evils are well known and will be discussed in future poems.

2. This verse should be read with the previous verse and the one following it. The Sight of the Jamal of God on the Day of Judgment and in Paradise thereafter is the highest reward and the climax of felicity for a Mu'min. According to the Holy Qur'an 56:7-56 men will be sorted out into three classes on the Day of Judgment, of which the highest in rank will be those in the class nearest to God and they will see His Face. Similarly, hell will be a transient abode to a Mu'min, to consume his sins and purify his soul, after which he will be admitted into Paradise. It is appropriate to give here ‘Allamah Iqbal's views on this matter and his rationale:

"However, according to the teachings of the Qur’an the ego's re-emergence brings him a sharp sight [50:22, (read with 17:13)] whereby he clearly sees his self-built fate fastened round his neck. Heaven and Hell are states, not localities. The descriptions in the Qur’an are visual representations of an inner fact, i.e. character. Hell, in the words of the Qur’an is God's kindled fire which mounts above the hearts - the painful realization of one's failure as a man. Heaven is the joy of triumph over the forces of disintegration. There is no such thing as eternal damnation in Islam. The word 'eternity' used in certain verses, relating to Hell, is explained by the Qur'an itself to mean only a period of time (78:23). Time cannot be wholly irrelevant to the development of personality. Character tends to become permanent; its re-shaping must require time. Hell, therefore, as conceived by the Qur'an is not a pit of everlasting torture inflicted by a revengeful God; it is a corrective experience which may make a hardened ego once more sensitive to the living breeze of Divine Grace. Nor is Heaven a holiday. Life is one and continuous. Man marches always onward to receive ever fresh illuminations from the Infinite Reality which 'every moment appears in a new glory. And the recipient of Divine Illuminations is not merely a passive recipient. Every act of a free ego creates a new situation, and thus further opportunities of creative unfolding."

3. This alludes to the Holy Qur’an 7:142-43. It means that Man is unable to see God in this material world and prophets are no exception to this.

4. The material human desire to understand everything terrestrial as well as celestial has led him into fields of materialistic knowledge which have partially or fully blinded him to the Beauty of Light and Truth, or the Jamal of God. However, every person derives the blessing or the curse of knowledge according to the measure of his effort and sincerity. Some people go completely astray and some witness the full Light of Truth and the majority get a combination of both to varying degrees. Imam Ghazala R.A. has discussed the different kinds of knowledge in detail in his famous book Al-Ihya al-'Ulum. 73-359. Mawlana Ruma has put all this wisdom in a nutshell in the following verse:

(158) Apply knowledge to the body, a serpent it becomes
Apply knowledge to the heart, a friend it becomes

5. Metaphor often used for the sky in Urdu and Persian on the basis that in the medieval cosmology the sky was described as a dome covering the earth.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-13.mp3
*
Mehr-e-Roshan Chup Gya, Uthi Niqab-e-Ruye Sham

Shan-e-Hasti Pe Hai Bikhra Huwa Gaisuay Sham









Ye Seyh Poshi Ki Tayari Kisi Ke Gham Mein Hai

Mehfil-e-Qudrat Magar Khurshid Ke Matam Mein Hai









Ker Raha Hai Aasman Jadoo Lab-e-Guftar Per

Sahar-e-Shab Ki Nazar Hai Didah-e-Beedar Per







Ghota Zan Daryae Khamoshi Mein Hai Mouj-e-Hawa

Haan, Magar Ek Door Se Ati Hai Awaz E Dra









Dil Ke Hai Betabi-e-Ulfat Mein Duniya Se Nafoor

Khanch Laya Hai Mujhe Hangama E Aalam Se Door







Manzar-e-Herman Naseebi Ka Tamashayi Hun Main

Hum Nasheen-e-Khuftagan-e-Kunj Tanhai Hun Main









Tham Zara Betabi-e-Dil! Baith Jane De Mujhe

Aur Iss Basti Pe Char Aansu Girane De Mujhe









Ae Mye Ghaflat Ke Sermasto! Kahan Rehte Ho Tum?

Kuch Kaho Uss Dais Ki Aakhir, Jahan Rehte Ho Tum





Woh Bhi Hairat Khana-e-Amroz O Farda Hai Koi?

Aur Pikar-e-Anasir Ka Tamasha Hai Koi









Admi Wan Bhi Hisar-e-Gham Mein Hai Mehsoor Kya?

Uss Walayat Mein Bhi Hai Insan Ka Dil Majboor Kya?









Wan Bhi Jal Merta Hai Soz-e-Shama Per Parwana Kya?

Uss Chaman Mein Bhi Gull-o-Bulbul Ka Hai Afsana Kya?









Yan To Ek Misre Mein Pehlu Se Nikal Jata Hai Dil

Shair Ki Germi Se Kya Wan Bi Phigalta Jata Hai Dil?









Rishta-o-Pewandiyan Ke Jaan Ka Azaar Hain

Uss Gulistan Mein Bhi Kya Aese Nukile Khar Hain?









Iss Jahan Mein Ek Maeeshat Aur So Uftad Hai

Rooh Kya Uss Daes Mein Iss Fikar Se Azad Hai?







Kya Wahan Bijli Bhi Hai, Dehqan Bhi Hai, Kherman Bhi Hai?

Kafle Wale Bhi Hain, Andaisha Rehzan Bhi Hai?









Tinke Chunte Hain Wahan Bhi Aashiyan Ke Wastay?

Khishat-e-Gill Ki Fikar Hoti Hai Makan Ke Wastay?







Wan Bhi Insan Apni Asliyat Se Begane Hain Kya ?

Imtiaz-e-Millat-o-Aaeen Ke Diwane Hain Kya?







Wan Bhi Kya Faryad-e-Bulbul Per Chaman Rota Nahin?

Iss Jahan Ki Tarah Wan Bhi Dard-e-Dil Hota Nahin?









Bagh Hai Fardous Ya Ek Manzal-e-Aramhai?

Ya Rukh E Be Perwa Husn-e-Azal Ka Naam Hai?









Kya Jahanum Maseeyat Sozi Ki Ek Tarkeeb Hai?

Aag Ke Sholon Mein Pinhan Maqsad-e-Tadeeb Hai?









Kya Ewz Raftar Ke Uss Dais Mein Parwaz Hai?

Mout Kehte Hain Jise Ahle Zameen, Kya Raaz Hai?









Iztarab-e-Dil Ka Saman Yan Ki Hast-o-Bood Hai

Ilm E Insan Uss Walayat Mein Bhi Kya Mehdood Hai?









Deed Se Taskeen Pata Hai Dil-e-Mahjoor Bhi?

'Lan Tarani' Keh Rahe Hain Ya Wahan Ke Toor Bhi?







Justujoo Mein Hai Wahan Bhi Rooh Ko Aaram Kya?

Wan Bhi Insan Hai Qateel-e-Zauq-e-Istafham Kya?





Aah! Vo Kishwar Bhi Tareeki Se Kya Mamoor Hai?

Ya Mohabbat Ki Tajalli Se Sarapa Noor Hai?









Tum Bata Do, Raaz Jo Iss Gunbad-e-Gardan Mein Hai

Mout Ek Chubhta Huwa Kanta Dil-e-Insan Mein Hai
*
