بلال
*
لکھا ہے ايک مغربي حق شناس نے
اہل قلم ميں جس کا بہت احترام تھا
جولاں گہ سکندر رومي تھا ايشيا
گردوں سے بھي بلند تر اس کا مقام تھا
تاريخ کہہ رہي ہے کہ رومي کے سامنے
دعوي کيا جو پورس و دارا نے، خام تھا
دنيا کے اس شہنشہ انجم سپاہ کو
حيرت سے ديکھتا فلک نيل فام تھا
آج ايشيا ميں اس کو کوئي جانتا نہيں
تاريخ دان بھي اسے پہچانتا نہيں
ليکن بلال، وہ حبشي زادئہ حقير
فطرت تھي جس کي نور نبوت سے مستنير
جس کا اميں ازل سے ہوا سينہء بلال
محکوم اس صدا کے ہيں شاہنشہ و فقير
ہوتا ہے جس سے اسود و احمر ميں اختلاط
کرتي ہے جو غريب کو ہم پہلوئے امير
ہے تازہ آج تک وہ نوائے جگر گداز
صديوں سے سن رہا ہے جسے گوش چرخ پير
اقبال! کس کے عشق کا يہ فيض عام ہے
رومي فنا ہوا ، حبشي کو دوام ہے
*
BILAL
*
This is the second poem in this book paying tribute to S. Bilal Ibn Rabah R.A. The poem has a comparison of the feebleness of materialistic power represented by Sikandar (Alexander) and the strength of spiritual and moral power represented by S. Bilal R.A. “Alexander” is shown to be Roman. Firstly, “Alexander” is a Greek name and no Roman emperor by this name is known. Secondly, reference to Porus and Dara in the third verse shows that Alexander of Greece is meant. The word “Ruma” has been used because Alexander was also the ruler of Asia Minor, which was later a part of the Eastern or the Byzantine wing of the Roman Empire. Also, both Rome and Greece were formidable powers in ancient history of Europe. See Explanatory Notes.
*
A righteous Western writer has written
Who was highly respected among the literateur

“Asia was the marshaling place of Sikandar $1 of Rome
His status was More elegant than even the sky

History attests that in combat with the Romans
The claims of Porus $2 and Dara $3 were vain

At this emperor with the myriad-man army
The blue sky was looking with amazement

Today nobody knows him in Asia $4
Even the historian does not recognize him

But Bilal, that humble person with Negroid origin
Whose nature had been brightened by the Prophethood’s Light

The call whose custodian the breast of Bilal since eternity $5 became
Subservient to which call emperors as well as the indigent became!

Which brings amity between the black and the red
By which the poor and the rich are placed together

That heart-melting song is fresh till the present age
Which the old sky’s ear has been hearing for centuries”

Iqbal ! This general blessing is due to whose love?
The Roman has perished, the Negro is immortal!
*
1. Sikandar or Alexander “The Great”.

2. Porus - See last reference

3. Dara.

4. Though Alexander is a hero to Europeans and the Western world he is remembered in Asia as a cruel and ravaging conqueror. ‘Allamah Iqbal himself has equated him with a pirate in his short poem titled “Aik Bahry Qazzaq Awr Sikandar” (A Pirate and Alexander). This poem is so succinct and explicit that the whole may be read and is cited below:

Alexander:
(206) Your reward is chains of imprisonment or my sword!
As from your piracy is in distress the ocean’s world

The Pirate:
(207) Alexander! Alas! you think this is bravery!
To you is it acceptable to tolerate disgrace of equals?
(208) Your profession is butchery, my profession is butchery
Both are piracies, yours on the land mine in the ocean!

5. Allusion to adhan.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-53.mp3
*


Likha Hai Aik Maghrabi Haq Shanas Ne

Ahl-e-Qalam Mein Jis Ka Bohat Ehtram Tha

Joulan Gah-e-Sikandar-e-Rumi Tha Asia

Gardoon Se Bhi Buland Tar Uss Ka Maqam Tha

Tareekh Keh Rahi Hai Ke Rumi Ke Samne

Dawa Kiya Jo Poras-o-Dara Ne, Khaam Tha

Dunya Ke Uss Shahenshah-o-Anjum Sipah Ko

Hairat Se Dekhta Falak-e-Neel Faam Tha

Aaj Asia Mein Uss Ko Koi Janta Nahin

Tareekh Daan Bhi Use Pehchanta Nahin

Lekin Bilal (R.A.) , Woh Habshi Zada Haqeer

Fitrat Thi Jis Ki Noor-e-Nabuwwat Se Mustaneer

Jis Ka Amen Azal Se Huwa Seena-e- Bilal (R.A.)

Mehkoom Uss Sada Ke Hain Shahanshah-o-Faqeer

Hota Hai Jis Se Aswad-o-Ahmar Mein Ikhtilaat

Karti Hai Jo Ghareeb Ko Hum Pehlu-e-Ameer

Hai Taza Aaj Tak Woh Nawa-e-Jigar Gudaz

Sadiyon Se Sun Raha Hai Jise Gosh-e-Charakh-e-Peer

Iqbal ! Kis Ke Ishq Ka Ye Faiz-e-Aam Hai

Rumi Fana Huwa, Habshi Ko Dawam Hai
*
