عقل و دل
*
عقل نے ايک دن يہ دل سے کہا
بھولے بھٹکے کي رہنما ہوں ميں
ہوں زميں پر ، گزر فلک پہ مرا
ديکھ تو کس قدر رسا ہوں ميں
کام دنيا ميں رہبري ہے مرا
مثل خضر خجستہ پا ہوں ميں
ہوں مفسر کتاب ہستي کي
مظہر شان کبريا ہوں ميں
بوند اک خون کي ہے تو ليکن
غيرت لعل بے بہا ہوں ميں
دل نے سن کر کہا يہ سب سچ ہے
پر مجھے بھي تو ديکھ ، کيا ہوں ميں
راز ہستي کو تو سمجھتي ہے
اور آنکھوں سے ديکھتا ہوں ميں
ہے تجھے واسطہ مظاہر سے
اور باطن سے آشنا ہوں ميں
علم تجھ سے تو معرفت مجھ سے
تو خدا جو ، خدا نما ہوں ميں
علم کي انتہا ہے بے تابي
اس مرض کي مگر دوا ہوں ميں
شمع تو محفل صداقت کي
حسن کي بزم کا ديا ہوں ميں
تو زمان و مکاں سے رشتہ بپا
طائر سدرہ آشنا ہوں ميں
کس بلندي پہ ہے مقام مرا
!عرش رب جليل کا ہوں ميں
*
THE INTELLECT AND THE HEART
*

*
One day Intellect said to the heart
"A guide to the misguided ones I am

Being on the earth I reach up to the sky
Look, how deep in comprehension I am

Guidance on earth is my sole occupation
Like the auspicious Khizr $1 in character I am

Interpreter of the book of life I am
The Manifestation of God's Glory I am

You are only a drop of blood, but
The invaluable ruby's envy I am"

Hearing this the heart said, "All this is true
But look at me as well, what I am

You understand the secrets of life
But seeing them with my own eyes I am

Concerned with the manifest order you are
And acquainted with the inward I am

Learning is from you, but Divine Knowledge is from me
You only seek Divinity, but showing Divinity I am

Restlessness is the end of Knowledge $2
But the remedy for that malady I am

You are the candle of the assembly of Truth
The lamp of the Divine Beauty's assemblage I am

You are related to time and space
The bird recognizing the Sidrah $3 I am

Look at the grandeur of my station
The throne of the God of Majesty I am
*
1. This alludes to The Holy Qur’an 18:65.

2. Knowledge does not lead to the comprehension of the Essence of God. It only confuses the seeker between the different explanations offered by different scholars. On the other hand the heart guides one to the final goal.

(159) Bu ‘Ala in Lailah's camel's dust-cloud is lost
Ruma’s hand has got the curtain of her litter

(160) Do not seek the way through the trickster Intellect
Come to Love, as it has perfection in this one art

3. This is an allusion to Archangel Jibra’al for which see the Holy Qur’an 53:14. The Sidrah or the lote tree is Zizyphus spina-Christi of which the crown of thorns worn by S. Isa A.S. is believed to have been made. The wild Lote tree is thorny and gives sour fruit. In cultivation it yields good fruit and shade, and is symbolic of heavenly bliss, as is said in the above verses. The symbolism of the first verse is that the farthest Lote tree marks the bounds of the spiritual world's knowledge as revealed to Man, beyond which neither angels nor human beings can go, physically or in insight. However, Iman can know about the contents of the space beyond the "Sidratu ’l-Muntaha " of the Holy Qur’an 56:28).
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-15.mp3
*

Aqal Ne Aik Din Ye Dil Se Kaha

Bhoole Bhatke Ki Rahnuma Hun Main







Hun Zameen Par, Guzr Falak Pe Mera

Dekh To Kis Qadar Rasa Hun Main







Kaam Dunya Mein Rahbari Hai Mera

Misl-e-Khizr-e-Khajasta Pa Hun Main







Hun Mufassir-e-Kitab-e-Hasti Ki

Mazhar-e-Shan-e-Kibriya Hun Main







Boond Ek Khoon Ki Hai Tu Lekin

Ghairat-e-Laal-e-Be Baha Hun Main







Dil Ne Sun Kar Kaha Ye Sub Sach Hai

Par Mujhe Bhi To Dekh, Kya Hun Main









Raaz-e-Hasti Ko Ti Samajhti Hai

Aur Ankhon Se Dekhta Hun Main!









Hai Tujhe Wasta Mazahir Se

Aur Batin Se Ashna Hun Main









Ilm Tujh Se To Maarifat Mujh Se

Tu Khuda Joo, Khuda Numa Hun Main







Ilm Ki Intiha Hai Betaabi

Iss Marz Ki Magar Dawa Hun Main









Shama Tu Mehfil-e-Sadaqat Ki

Husn Ki Bazm Ka Diya Hun Main









Tu Zaman-o-Makan Se Rishta Bapa

Taeer-e-Sidra Se Ashna Hun Main









Kis Bulandi Pe Hai Maqam Mera



Arsh Rab-e-Jaleel Ka Hun Main!

*
