ميں اورتو
*
نہ سليقہ مجھ ميں کليم کا نہ قرينہ تجھ ميں خليل کا
ميں ہلاک جادوئے سامري، تو قتيل شيوئہ آزري
ميں نوائے سوختہ در گلو ، تو پريدہ رنگ، رميدہ بو
ميں حکايت غم آرزو ، تو حديث ماتم دلبري
مرا عيش غم ،مرا شہد سم ، مري بود ہم نفس عدم
ترا دل حرم، گرو عجم ترا ديں خريدہ کافري
دم زندگي رم زندگي، غم زندگي سم زندگي
غم رم نہ کر، سم غم نہ کھا کہ يہي ہے شان قلندري
تري خاک ميں ہے اگر شرر تو خيال فقر و غنا نہ کر
کہ جہاں ميں نان شعير پر ہے مدار قوت حيدري
!کوئي ايسي طرز طواف تو مجھے اے چراغ حرم بتا
کہ ترے پتنگ کو پھر عطا ہو وہي سرشت سمندري
گلہء جفائے وفا نما کہ حرم کو اہل حرم سے ہے
'کسي بت کدے ميں بياں کروں تو کہے صنم بھي 'ہري ہري
نہ ستيزہ گاہ جہاں نئي نہ حريف پنجہ فگن نئے
وہي فطرت اسد اللہي وہي مرحبي، وہي عنتري
کرم اے شہ عرب و عجم کہ کھڑے ہيں منتظر کرم
وہ گدا کہ تو نے عطا کيا ہے جنھيں دماغ سکندري
*
I AND YOU
*
This poem is somewhat similar to poem 116 of the same name. However, its message goes farther than that of the pervious one. The main message is in praise and support of sacrifice in the cause of God and contentment with what material resources are available after making these sacrifices. The inspiration for this poem comes from the Holy Qur’an 2:153-157. The poem ends with a sincere supplication to God to create the degree of aman among Muslims which would make them attain that ideal.
*
Neither I have Kalam’s $1 knowledge nor you have Khalal’s $2 manners
I am destroyed by Samira’s $3 magic, you are the victim of Azar’s $4 method!

I am the scalded, unsung song, you are the faded color, the departed fragrance
I am the tale of grief’s longing, you are the narration of love’s mourning!

My grief is pleasure, my poison is honey, my existence is companion of annihilation
Your heart is Haram, captivated by the ‘Ajam, your dan has been purchased by infidelity!

Loss of life is its essence, concern for life is its poison
Do not be sad for loss, do not take grief’s poison as this is the way of qalandara!

Do not care for poverty and affluence, if your dust has a spark
Because in the world Haider’s $5 strength depends on bread of Sha‘ar $6

O Haram’s lamp tell me some such method of circumambulation
Which would again grant to your moth the same salamander’s $7 nature!

The complaint of friendly cruelty which the Haram has against its people
If I relate in some temple even the idol would call out “Hari Hari” $8

Neither the world’s battle-fields nor the arm-twisting enemies are new
The nature of Asad-ul-Laha $9 as well as Marhaba $10 and ‘Antara $11 are the same

Mercy ! O Arab and ‘Ajam’s Lord $12, as waiting for benevolence are
# translation missing
*
1. Kalam.
2. Khalal- Khalal is an abbreviation “Khalal Allah” (The Friend of God) which is the title of S. Ibraham A.S.

3. Samiri- He was a clever man, or magician, who was with Bani Isra’al during their exodus from Egypt. He misled Bana Isra’al and persuaded them to melt their gold ornaments, mold them into a calf and worship the same. This happened during the period when in the Sinai desert, S. Musa A.S had gone to Mount tur in pursuit of fire and where he was honored with conversation with God. For more details on Samira see The Holy Qur’an 20:85-98, No. 8, pp. 781-84. Also see the Holy Bible Exodus xii : 35-36.

4. Azar.

5. Haider - This is another name of S. ‘Ala R.A.

6. Sha‘ar- This is one of the coarse and cheap grains grown in many Asian countries, including the Arab countries and the Indian sub-continent. The word is usually translated as “barley”which is not correct as it does not resemble barley in appearance or value. The Persian and Urdu word “jau” is appropriate. The bread of Sha‘ar or jau represents “simple living and high thinking”.
7. Salamander This is a mythical creature supposed to be living and flourishing in fire as well as liking it.

8. Hari- This is the name of the Hindu deity Vishnu. The expression Hara Hara is used by the Hindus in the Indian sub-continent for expressing extreme surprise or disgust.

9. Asad-ul-Laha- Literally it means the attributes of being the Lion of God. As a mark of great respect S. ‘Ala R.A. is known as Asad Ullah or the “Lion of God” on account of his proverbial prowess.

10. Marhaba-This alludes to Marhab of Khaibar. Khaibar was an oasis about 320 km. north of Madina-i-Munawwarah. It was a fertile tract where Jews had gathered after being expelled from Palestine by the Romans and several encounters with the Islamic State which they had lost. It was the biggest and the most fortified stronghold of Jews in the Arabian Peninsula. The Jews, living there in prosperity, were the biggest adversaries of Islam at that time. They were constantly plotting against Islam in collusion with the pagan and hypocrite Arab tribes. This state of affairs could not be tolerated for long and the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) was compelled to invade Khaibar in 629. At that time Khaibar comprised six fortresses, the strongest and safest of which was Qamus, which was headed by Marhab. He was a Jewish hero and was considered to be equivalent to a thousand cavalry men on account of his strength and bravery. This fortress was finally attacked by Muslims under the leadership of S. ‘Ala (R.A.) after several unsuccessful attempts under other leaders. Marhab made his appearance first, very heavily armed in full armor. He was engaged in battle by S. ‘Ali (R.A). After a short engagement S.‘Ala (R.A.) killed him and the fortress fell. According to this hemistich marhaba or the anti-Islamic activities of Marhab still persist. The strength and prowess of Sayyidina ‘Ali (R.A) also persist till today. Only it has to be activated and used to face and vanquish the powers of evil.

11. ‘Antara- This is an allusion to the “Romance of ‘Antar” which consists of the tales of chivalry centered round the black Arab desert poet and warrior, ‘Antar Ibn Shaddad, who was one of the poets of the celebrated pre-Islamic poetic collection called “al-Mu ‘allaqat” (These were literary pieces of superb composition which were hung on the walls of the K‘abah in the pre-Islamic period as a recognition of their merit). It’s origin is not clear. The “Romance of ‘Antar” evolved out of a Bedouin tradition that emphasized nobility of character and desert chivalry, and of which ‘Antar was made the epitome. It was written in rhymed prose interspersed with 10,000 poetic verses, divided into 32 books, each being a tale in suspense. This romance relates the fabulous childhood of ‘Antar son of an Arab king by a black slave girl and his adventures for the hand of his cousin, Ahad, in marriage.

The reference here is to the attributes of ‘Antar, particularly his chivalry and perseverance.

12. This is reference to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-65.mp3
*



Na Saliqa Mujh Mein Kaleem Ka Na Qareena Tujh Mein Khalil Ka

Mein Halak-e-Jadoo-e-Samri, Tu Qateel-e-Shewa-e-Azari


Main Nawaye Soukhta Dar Guloo, Tu Parida Rang, Ramida Bu

Mein Hikayat-e-Gham-e-Arzoo, Tu Hadees-e-Matam-e-Dilbari


Mera Aysh Gham, Mera Shehad Samm, Meri Bood Hum Nafas-e-Adam

Tera Dil Haram, Girv-e-Ajam, Tera Deen Khareeda-e-Kafiri


Dam Zindagi Ram-e-Zindagi, Gham-e-Zindagi Sam-e-Zindagi

Gham-e-Ram Na Kar, Sam-e-Gham Na Kha Ke Yehi Hai Shan-e-Qalandari


Teri Khak Mein Hai Agar Sharar To Khiyal-e-Faqr-o-Ghana Na Kar

Ke Jahan Mein Naan-e-Shaeer Par Hai Madar-e-Quwwat-e-Haidari


Koi Aesi Tarz-e-Tawaaf Tu Mujhe Ae Charagh-e-Haram Bata!

Ke Tere Patang Ko Phir Atta Ho Wohi Sarisht-e-Samundari


Gila-e-Jafaye Wafa Nama Ke Haram Ko Ahl-e-Haram Se Hai

Kisi Butkude Mein Byan Krun To Kahe Sanam Bhi ‘Hari Hari’


Na Sataiza-Gah-e-Jahan Nayi Na Hareef-e-Panja Faggan Naye

Wohi Fitrat-e-Asadullahi, Wohi Marhabi, Wohi Aantari


Karam Ae Shah (S.A.W.) -e-Arab-o-Ajam Ke Khare Hain Muntazir-e-Karam

Woh Gaza Ke Tu Ne Atta Kiya Hai Jinhain Damagh-e-Sikandari
*
