يہ سرود قمري و بلبل فريب گوش ہے
*
يہ سرود قمري و بلبل فريب گوش ہے
باطن ہنگامہ آباد چمن خاموش ہے
تيرے پيمانوں کا ہے يہ اے مےء مغرب اثر
خندہ زن ساقي ہے، ساري انجمن بے ہوش ہے
دہر کے غم خانے ميں تيرا پتا ملتا نہيں
جرم تھا کيا آفرينش بھي کہ تو روپوش ہے
آہ! دنيا دل سمجھتي ہے جسے، وہ دل نہيں
پہلوئے انساں ميں اک ہنگامہء خاموش ہے
زندگي کي رہ ميں چل، ليکن ذرا بچ بچ کے چل
يہ سمجھ لے کوئي مينا خانہ بار دوش ہے
جس کے دم سے دلي و لاہور ہم پہلو ہوئے
آہ، اے اقبال وہ بلبل بھي اب خاموش ہے
*
THESE SONGS OF TURTLE DOVES AND NIGHTINGALES ARE MERELY EAR’S ILLUSION
*
This ghazal is very mystical and, as is usual with ghazals it deals with different subjects.
*
These songs of turtle doves and nightingales are merely ear’s illusion
Behind this uproar the world of the garden is silent $1

O Western wine the effect of your goblets is only this
That cup-bearer is laughing and the entire assembly is unconscious $2

In the world’s sorrowful house you are not traceable
Was creation also a crime so Your nature is concealed $3 ?

Ah! What the world considers heart is not heart
In the human breast this is a silent tumult $4

Walk on the path of life but walk carefully
Understand that some glass work is on your shoulders $5

Through whom Delhi and Lahore were drawn together
Ah! Iqbal that nightingale is silent now $6
*
1. These two verses mean that the universe has no real existence and is only a figment of human imagination. This concept is based on Plato’s philosophy of idealism, according to which the universe is only something in human thought and as such is only an idea and not a reality. This is also believed in a modified form of sufism according to which the real existence is that of God only and the universe is only a figment of human mind. The casual mention of this thought in this ghazal does not mean that ‘Allamah Iqbal believed in Plato’s philosophy. It has been shown earlier that he was very much opposed to Plato and his philosophy, which distracts Man from deeds and engulfs him in mere thought. The second hemstitch of the verse contradicts Plato’s thought.

2. This verse metaphorically expresses the thought that Western wisdom is only outwardly idealistic and has no reality in its heart. The same thought has been expressed earlier in the fourth part of Poem 144. (Khizar-i-Rah).

3. This verse is addressed to God which means that all human Intellect is helpless in understanding His Nature.

4. Same as first reference of the poem

5. This verse emphasizes the Islamic concept that Man should live a life of full involvement in the world but in such a manner that the world and its material benefits should be used for Man’s betterment but should not become part of Man’s ideal or purpose of his life. This delicate thought is presented in the second hemstitch.

6. This verse refers to the famous Urdu poet Khwajah Alèaf Husain Hala for whom ‘Allamah Iqbal had much respect.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-71-2.MP3
*
Ye Surood-e-Qumri-o-Bulbul Faraib-e-Gosh Hai
Batin-e-Hangama Abad-e-Chaman Khamosh Hai

Tere Pemanon Ka Hai Ye Ae Mai-e-Maghrib Asar

Khanda-Zan Saqi Hai, Sari Anjuman Be-Hosh Hai

Dehr Ke Gham Khane Mein Tera Pata Milta Nahin

Jurm Tha Kya Afreenish Bhi Ke Tu Ru-Posh Hai

Ah, Dunya Dil Samajhti Hai Jise, Woh Dil Nahin

Pehlu-e-Insan Mein Ek Hangama-e-Khamosh Hai

Zindagi Ki Rah Mein Chal, Lekin Zara Bach Bach Ke Chal

Ye Samajh Le Koi Meena Khana Bar-e-Dosh Hai

Jis Ke Dam Se Dilli-o-Lahore Hum Pehlu Huwe
Ah, Ae Iqbal! Woh Bulbul Bhi Ab Khamosh Hai

*
