گل پژمردہ
*
کس زباں سے اے گل پژمردہ تجھ کو گل کہوں
کس طرح تجھ کو تمنائے دل بلبل کہوں
تھي کبھي موج صبا گہوارہء جنباں ترا
نام تھا صحن گلستاں ميں گل خنداں ترا
تيرے احساں کا نسيم صبح کو اقرار تھا
باغ تيرے دم سے گويا طبلہء عطار تھا
تجھ پہ برساتا ہے شبنم ديدہء گرياں مرا
ہے نہاں تيري اداسي ميں دل ويراں مرا
ميري بربادي کي ہے چھوٹي سي اک تصوير تو
خوا ب ميري زندگي تھي جس کي ہے تعبير تو
ہمچو نے از نيستان خود حکايت مي کنم
بشنو اے گل! از جدائي ہا شکايت مي کنم
*
THE WITHERED ROSE
*
This poem is not just a picture of autumn in the garden when the rose and other flowers wither away and present a picture of sadness and desolation. It is a metaphorical elegy of the sad state of affairs of the Muslim Ummah. The description of the life of the rose in the spring, in the first three verses, represents the period of the glory of the Ummah, and the period of autumn, in the last three verses, represents its present state. The last two verses indicate ‘Allamah Iqbal's frustration which can be appreciated only by those similarly afflicted.
*
O withered rose! How can I still call you a rose?
How can I call you the longing of nightingale's heart?

Once the zephyr's movement was your rocking cradle
In the garden's expanse joyous rose was your name

The morning breeze acknowledged your benevolence
The garden was like perfumer's tray by your presence

My weeping eye sheds dew on you
My desolate heart is concealed in your sorrow

You are a tiny picture of my destruction
You are the interpretation of my life's dream

Like a flute $1 to my reed-brake I narrate my story
Listen O rose! I complain about separations!
*
1. The melodious tune of the flute, which is made of reed, is full of feelings, representing the flute's pathos on its separation from the reed-brake, where its origin and homeland is. This verse is a slightly modified version of the opening verse of "Daftar-i-Awwal" (The First Book) of Ruma's Mathnava-i-Ma‘nava (The Spiritual Mathnavi), which is as follows

(164) Listen to the flute as narrates it
As separation's complaint makes it

Mawlana Ruma's narration of complaint of the flute's reed is caused by its separation from the reed-brake and is contained in many successive verses, which form the Prelude of his Mathnava. The Mathnava itself is, in brief, an exposition of tasawwuf as related by the flute. The motivation for this comes from the pathos of the reed due to its separation from the reed-brake. Similarly, ‘Allamah Iqbal means that his philosophy, which is spread over his entire works, and some of which will unfold in "Bang-i-Dara" as we proceed, is motivated by his separation from the object of his Love, i.e. God and the present state of the Muslim Ummah.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-22.MP3
*
Kis Zuban Se Ae Gul-e-Pazmurda Tujh Ko Gul Kahun
Kis Tarah Yujh Ko Tamanye Dil-e-Bulbul Kahun



Thi Kabhi Mouj-e-Saba Gehwara-e-Junbaan Tera
Naam Tha Sehan-e-Gulistan Mein Gul-e-Khandan Tera



Tere Ehsan Ka Naseem-e-Sbahko Iqrar Tha
Bagh Tere Dam Se Goya Table-e-Attar Tha



Tujh Pe Barsata Hai Shabnam Didah-e-Giryan Mera
Hai Nihan Teri Udasi Mein Dil-e-Weeran Mera



Meri Barbadi Ki Hai Choti Si Ek Tasveer Tu
Khawab Meri Zindagi Thi Jis Ki Hai Tabeer Tu



Humcho Ne Az Neestan-e-Khud Hikayat Mee Kunam
Bashno Ae Gul! Az Judai Ha Shikayat Mee Kunam
*
