کشادہ دست کرم جب وہ بے نياز کرے
*
کشادہ دست کرم جب وہ بے نياز کرے
نياز مند نہ کيوں عاجزي پہ ناز کرے
!بٹھا کے عرش پہ رکھا ہے تو نے اے واعظ
خدا وہ کيا ہے جو بندوں سے احتراز کرے
مري نگاہ ميں وہ رند ہي نہيں ساقي
جو ہوشياري و مستي ميں امتياز کرے
مدام گوش بہ دل رہ ، يہ ساز ہے ايسا
جو ہو شکستہ تو پيدا نوائے راز کرے
کوئي يہ پوچھے کہ واعظ کا کيا بگڑتا ہے
جو بے عمل پہ بھي رحمت وہ بے نياز کرے
سخن ميں سوز ، الہي کہاں سے آتا ہے
يہ چيز وہ ہے کہ پتھر کو بھي گداز کرے
تميز لالہ و گل سے ہے نالہء بلبل
جہاں ميں وانہ کوئي چشم امتياز کرے
غرور زہد نے سکھلا ديا ہے واعظ کو
کہ بندگان خدا پر زباں دراز کرے
ہوا ہو ايسي کہ ہندوستاں سے اے اقبال
اڑا کے مجھ کو غبار رہ حجاز کرے
*
WHEN THAT BENIAZ OPENS HIS GRACEFUL HAND
*

*
When that Beniaz opens His Graceful Hand
Why should the niazmand be not proud of his humility $1

You have confined Him to the ‘Arsh, O preacher !
What kind of God would keep away from His people? $2

In my view he is not a rind $3 at all, O cup-bearer
Who would distinguish between ecstasy and lack of it $4

Always remain very attentive to the heart, this orchestra is such
If broken, it would produce the music of the Secret

Somebody should ask how it hurts the preacher
If God shows His Grace even to the sinner

O God! From where does poetry acquire its heat?
This is a thing with which even stone would soften

Nightingale’s lament comes from discrimination between tulip and rose
No one in the world should open the discriminating eye

The arrogance of piety has taught the preacher
To use abusive language to the people of God $5

Such wind should blow from India, O Iqbal
Which would blow me as dust to Hijaz
*
1. The words Beniaz and Niazmand are difficult to translate. Literally, they mean "the one without need" and "the needy" respectively. They are attributes of God and Man respectively and are used for them. This verse describes the correct psychology of a real man of God, in that on account of the boundless Grace and Beneficence of God, the man who is a real devotee of Him would be proud of his being the needy one. It is so because it is only in this way that he would deserve the Grace of his Lord. The use of Beniaz and Niazmand in the same verse is a mark of literary elegance.

2. God is Omni-present and transcends time and space. In that way He is close to His people. See the Holy Quran 2:186 and 50:16 to cite only a few verses on this subject.

3. Rind is a person who has gone so far in the Love of God that he has become ecstatic and is not able to follow the requirements of the Shara‘h.

4. As long as a person is consciously aware of being or not being ecstatic he is not a rind. He becomes a rind only when he loses this consciousness also.

5. Allusion to and sarcasm on the arrogance of the seemingly pious persons who are so arrogant that they are rude to other people. Really pious people are not rude and are very modest. Modesty is one of the components of piety.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-50-11.mp3
*
Kushada Dast-e-Karam Jab Woh Be-Niaz Kare
Niazmand Na Kyun Ajazi Pe Naaz Kare


Bitha Ke Arsh Pe Rakha Hai Tu Ne Ae Waaiz!
Khuda Woh Kya Hai Jo Bandon Se Ehtraz Kare


Meri Nigah Mein Woh Rind Hi Nahin Saqi
Jo Hoshiyari-o-Masti Mein Imtiaz Kare


Madaam Gosh Ba Dil Reh, Ye Saaz Hai Aesa
Jo Ho Shikasta To Paida Nawa-e-Raaz Kare


Koi Ye Puche Ke Waaiz Ka Kya Bigarta Hai
Jo Be-Amal Pe Bhi Rehmat Woh Be-Niaz Kare


Sukhan Mein Souz, Elahi Kahan Se Ata Ha
Ye Cheez Woh Hai Ke Pathar Ko Bhi Gudaz Kare


Tameez-e-Lala-o-Gul Se Hai Nala-e-Bulbul
Jahan Mein Wa Na Koi Chashm-e-Imtiaz Kare


Ghuroor-e-Zuhd Ne Shikhla Diya Hai Waaiz Ko
Ke Bandgan-e-Khuda Par Zuban Daraz Kare


Hawa Ho Aesi Ke Hindustan Se Ae Iqbal
Ura Ke Mujh Ko Ghubar-e-Rah-e-Hijaz Kare
*
