مجنوں نے شہر چھوڑا تو صحرا بھي چھوڑ دے
*
مجنوں نے شہر چھوڑا تو صحرا بھي چھوڑ دے
نظارے کي ہوس ہو تو ليلي بھي چھوڑ دے
واعظ! کمال ترک سے ملتي ہے ياں مراد
دنيا جو چھوڑ دي ہے تو عقبي بھي چھوڑ دے
تقليد کي روش سے تو بہتر ہے خودکشي
رستہ بھي ڈھونڈ ، خضر کا سودا بھي چھوڑ دے
مانند خامہ تيري زباں پر ہے حرف غير
بيگانہ شے پہ نازش بے جا بھي چھوڑ دے
لطف کلام کيا جو نہ ہو دل ميں درد عشق
بسمل نہيں ہے تو تو تڑپنا بھي چھوڑ دے
شبنم کي طرح پھولوں پہ رو ، اور چمن سے چل
اس باغ ميں قيام کا سودا بھي چھوڑ دے
ہے عاشقي ميں رسم الگ سب سے بيٹھنا
بت خانہ بھي ، حرم بھي ، کليسا بھي چھوڑ دے
سوداگري نہيں ، يہ عبادت خدا کي ہے
اے بے خبر! جزا کي تمنا بھي چھوڑ دے
اچھا ہے دل کے ساتھ رہے پاسبان عقل
ليکن کبھي کبھي اسے تنہا بھي چھوڑ دے
جينا وہ کيا جو ہو نفس غير پر مدار
شہرت کي زندگي کا بھروسا بھي چھوڑ دے
!شوخي سي ہے سوال مکرر ميں اے کليم
شرط رضا يہ ہے کہ تقاضا بھي چھوڑ دے
واعظ ثبوت لائے جو مے کے جواز ميں
اقبال کو يہ ضد ہے کہ پينا بھي چھوڑ دے
*
MAJNUN ABANDONED HABITATION, YOU SHOULD ABANDON WILDERNESS ALSO
*
The subject matter of this ghazal is a continuation of ghazal 10 in that it emphasizes the need for the Love of God to be selfless and complete. The poem adds another value of Islam, viz. that all actions of a Mu’min should be prompted only by the un-adulterated Love of God and should not have even the motive of thawab. Only that good deed is acceptable to God which is performed purely in pursuit of the Pleasure of God.
*
Majnun abandoned habitation, you should abandon wilderness also
If there be ambition for Sight, you should abandon Lailah also $1

O preacher! Perfection of abandonment attains the objective
As you have abandoned the world, abandon the Hereafter also

Suicide is better than the way of taqlad $2
Seek your own path, abandon the love of Khizr $3 also

Like the pen the un-Islamic message is on your tongue
Abandon unjustified pride in the un-Islamic objects also

Theology is no pleasure if heart does not have Love’s pathos
If you are not the Wounded, you should abandon fluttering also

Weep like the dew on flowers and leave the garden
Abandon the desire of staying in this garden also

The custom of Love is abandonment of all
Abandon temple, mosque, and church also

This is not business, this is ‘ibadat $4 of God !
O ignorant one, abandon the longing for reward also

It is good to guard Intuition with Intellect
But sometimes you should let it go alone also $5

What life is that which is dependent on others ?
Abandon dependence on the life of fame also

Repeated request is a kind of boldness ! O Kalam
The condition for approbation is to abandon urging also

As the preacher brought proof in support of wine
Iqbal insists that he should abandon drinking also $6
*
1. Allusion to the story of Lailah and Majnun. Majnun gave up living in human habitations and started roaming about in the wilderness. The Lover of God is advised to abandon wilderness also. This is so because it is immaterial for a Lover of God whether he lives in habitations or in the wilderness as God is independent of space and time and is omni-present. The Lover will find Him anywhere and everywhere provided his Love is selfless and sincere.

2. Taqlad. Literally it means following the accepted path. In ‘Allamah Iqbal’s terminology it means blind following of traditions.

3. Khizar. Traditionally he is believed to guide the wayfarers who have gone astray.

4. ‘Ibadat. This is wrongly understood to mean "worship" and formal prayers and the latter are considered to be the climax of piety. This word is derived from the root ‘abd, which literally means a "slave" or "servant". In the Holy Qur’an ‘abd designates the nature, status and destiny of Man, that he is a slave of God and is neither Divine nor has any share in the Powers and Rights of God. According to this his destiny is ‘Abdiyat, ‘Ubudiyat, or bondage. He is required to be a perfect servant or "abd". In Persian and Urdu " ‘abdiyat" is more commonly used than ‘Ubudiyat. Bandah and bandaga are the Persian equivalents of ‘abd and ‘Ubudiyat respectively. ‘Ibadat really means obedience with absolute self-surrender and humility. It includes worship, reverence, and prayer but is really comprised of honesty and sincerity to God in all phases and departments of life. The second line of this verse means that only the Love of God should be the motive force for a Mu’min’s virtuous actions. It is not a trade in which one offers his merchandise and expects a reward as its price. Only that piety is acceptable to God which is performed without the desire for thawab.

5. See "The Controversy of ‘Aql and Dil" for a discussion of Intuition and Intellect.

6. It is not clear whether the proof is meant for the virtues of abstention from drinking or that of drinking. In either case the verse shows strong doubts in the mind of ‘Allamah Iqbal about the sincerity of the half-baked ‘Ulama. If the former interpretation is taken it means that unless the preacher himself gives up drinking his preaching cannot be taken as serious. This would mean that such ‘Ulama do not practice what they preach. If the latter interpretation is accepted it would mean that if such an ‘alim supports drinking the ‘Allamah would doubt his sincerity and would give up drinking.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-13.mp3
*
Majnoon Ne Sheher Chora Tu Sehra Bhi Chor De
Nazare Ki Hawas Ho To Laila Bhi Chor De



Waaiz! Kamal-e-Tark Se Milti Hai Yaan Murad
Dunya Jo Chor Di Ha To Uqba Bhi Chor De



Taqleed Ki Rawish Se To Behter Hai Khudkushi
Rasta Bhi Dhoond, Khizr Ka Soda Bhi Chor De

Manind-e-Khama Teri Zuban Par Hai Harf-e-Ghair
Begana Shay Pe Nazish-e-Bay-Ja Bhi Chor De



Lutf-e-Kalaam Kya Jo Na Ho Dil Mein Dard-e-Ishq
Bismil Nahin Hai Tu To Tarapna Bhi Chor De



Shabnam Ki Tarah Phoolon Pe Ro, Aur Chaman Se Chal
Iss Bagh Mein Qayam Ka Soda Bhi Chor De



Hai Ashiqi Mein Rasm Alag Sub Se Baithna
Butkhana Bhi, Haram Bhi, Kaleesa Bhi Chor De



Sodagari Nahin, Ye Ibadat Khuda Ki Hai
Ae Be-Khabar! Jaza Ki Tamanna Bhi Chor De



Acha Hai Dil Ke Sath Rahe Paasban-e-Aqal
Lekin Kabhi Kabhi Isse Tanha Bhi Chor De


Jeena Woh Kya Jo Ho Nafas-e-Ghair Par Madar
Shohrat Ki Zindagi Ka Bhrosa Bhi Chor De



Shaukhi Si Hai Sawal-e-Mukarar? Mein Ae Kaleem!
Shart-e-Raza Ye Hai Ke Taqaza Bhi Chor De



Waaiz Saboot Laye Jo Mai Ke Jawaz Mein
Iqbal Ko Ye Zid Hai Peena Bhi Chor De
*
