مثال پرتو مے ، طوف جام کرتے ہيں
*
مثال پرتو مے ، طوف جام کرتے ہيں
يہي نماز ادا صبح و شام کرتے ہيں
خصوصيت نہيں کچھ اس ميں اے کليم تري
شجر حجر بھي خدا سے کلام کرتے ہيں
نيا جہاں کوئي اے شمع ڈھونڈيے کہ يہاں
ستم کش تپش ناتمام کرتے ہيں
بھلي ہے ہم نفسو اس چمن ميں خاموشي
کہ خوشنوائوں کو پابند دام کرتے ہيں
غرض نشاط ہے شغل شراب سے جن کي
حلال چيز کو گويا حرام کرتے ہيں
!بھلا نبھے گي تري ہم سے کيونکر اے واعظ
کہ ہم تو رسم محبت کو عام کرتے ہيں
!الہي سحر ہے پيران خرقہ پوش ميں کيا
کہ اک نظر سے جوانوں کو رام کرتے ہيں
ميں ان کي محفل عشرت سے کانپ جاتا ہوں
جو گھر کو پھونک کے دنيا ميں نام کرتے ہيں
!ہرے رہو وطن مازني کے ميدانو
جہاز پر سے تمھيں ہم سلام کرتے ہيں
جو بے نماز کبھي پڑھتے ہيں نماز اقبال
بلا کے دير سے مجھ کو امام کرتے ہيں
*
WE CIRCUMAMBULATE THE WINE‑CUP LIKE THE WINE'S REFLECTION
*

*
We circumambulate the wine‑cup like the wine's reflection
We are offering this prayer from morning till evening $1

You are not singular in this O Kalam $2
Trees and stones are also talking with God $3

O Candle! Search for a new world, because here $4
We are enduring tyrannies of the incomplete Love

O Companions! Silence in this garden is good
As the melodious ones are kept in cages here

Those whose purpose is pleasure from wine
Are changing the lawful into the unlawful $5

How can you and we reconcile, O preacher
As we are making the custom of Love universal!

O God! What magic is concealed in the saints, clad in rags!
That they subdue the youth with a single glance

I shudder at the pleasures of their assemblies
Who are getting fame by destroying their homes

May the meadows of the motherland be ever flourishing
We are saluting you from the ship $6 sailing away

When those un-accustomed to prayers $7 assemble for one, Iqbal
Calling me back from temple they make me their Imam $8
*
1. Our daily prayers are only ritual in nature. They resemble circumambulation of the wine‑cup rather that of the wine. Similarly our circumambulation of the Holy Ka'bah does not make us close to God which the Holy Ka'bah represents.

2. Kalam‑ S. Musa A.S.

3. Allusion to the verses of the Holy Qur'an which give this information, e.g. 62:1 and 64:1. This means that the Love of and approach to God is universally present in the nature of all His creation, even in inanimate objects.

4. This and the next verse express the quest for a new world because the world of the Indian sub‑continent was not suitable for expression of the true Love for God, which among other things, includes political freedom, which was anathema to the British Government in India.

5. This verse refers to the two kinds of wine. One is the wine of the Love of God, which is not only lawful but essential for the fulfillment of the potentials of human life. The other one is the ordinary wine which people drink for pleasure, which is not only unlawful, but dulls those potentials.

6. This expresses ‘Allamah Iqbal's patriotism at the time of his departure from India.

7. The portion in italics refers to the people who are un‑accustomed to prayers for show. This is sarcasm on the ostentatious people who look down upon people who do not show off their piety.

8. Imam- Leader of the Muslim congregational prayer.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-25-6.MP3
*
Misal-e-Partou Mai Tof-e-Jaam Karte Hain
Yehi Namaz Ada Subah-o-Shaam Karte Hain


Khasoosiat Nahin Kuch Iss Mein Ae Kaleem Teri
Shajar Hajar Bhi Khuda Se Kalam Karte Hain


Naya Jahan Koi Ae Shama! Dhoondiye Ke Yahan
Sitam Kash-e-Tapish-e-Natamam Karte Hain


Bhali Hai Hum Nafso Iss Chaman Mein Khamoshi
Ke Khushnawaon Ko Paband-e-Daam Karte Hain


Gharz Nishaat Hai Shughal-e-Sharab Se Jin Ki
Hilal Cheez Ko Goya Haram Karte Hain


Bhala Nibhe Gi Teri Hum Se Kyunkar Ae Waiz!
Ke Hum To Rasm-e-Mohabbat Ko Aam Karte Hain


Elahi Sehar Hai Peeran-e-Kharqa Posh Mein Kya!
Ke Ek Nazar Se Jawanon Ko Raam Karte Hain


Main Un Ki Mehfil-e-Ishrat Se Kanp Jata Hun
Jo Ghar Ko Phoonk Ke Dunya Mein Naam Karte Hain


Hare Raho Watan-e-Maazni Ke Maidano!
Jahaz Par Se Tumhain Hum Salam Karte Hain


Jo Be-Namaz Kabhi Parhte Hain Namaz Iqbal
Bula Ke Dair Se Mujh Ko Imam Karte Hain
*
