اشکی چند بر افتراق ہندیان
*
ای ھمالہ ! ای اطک ، ای رود گنگ
زیستن تا کی چنان بی آب و رنگ
پیر مردان از فراست بی نصیب
نوجوانان از محبت بی نصیب
شرق و غرب آزاد و ما نخچیر غیر
خشت ما سرمایۂ تعمیر غیر
زندگانے بر مراد دیگران
جاودان مرگست ، نی خواب گران
نیست این مرگی کہ آید ز آسمان
تخم او می بالد ز اعماق جان
صید او نے مردہ شو خواہد نہ گور
نی ھجوم دوستان از نزد و دور
جامۂ کس در غم او چاک نیست
دوزخ او آنسوی افلاک نیست
در ھجوم روز حشر او را مجو
ہست در امروز او فردای او
ہر کہ اینجا دانہ کشت اینجا درود
پیش حق آن بندہ را بردن چہ سود
امتے کز آرزو نیشی نخورد
نقش او را فطرت از گیتی سترد
اعتبار تخت و تاج از ساحری است
سخت چون سنگ این زجاج از ساحریست
در گذشت از حکم این سحر مبین
کافری از کفر ، دینداری ز دین
ہندیان با یکدگر آویختند
فتنہ ہای کہنہ باز انگیختند
تا فرنگی قومی از مغرب زمین
ثالث آمد در نزاع کفر و دین
کس نداند جلوۂ آب از سراب
انقلاب ای انقلاب ای انقلاب

ای ترا ہر لحظہ فکر آب و گل
از حضور حق طلب یک زندہ دل
آشیانش گرچہ در آب و گل است
نہ فلک سر گشتہ این یک دل است
تا نپنداری کہ از خاک است او
از بلندی ہای افلاک است او
این جہان او را حریم کوی دوست
از قبای لالہ گیرد بوی دوست
ہر نفس با روزگار اندر ستیز
سنگ رہ از ضربت او ریز ریز
آشنای منبر و دار است او
آتش خود را نگہدار است او
آب جوی و بحر ہا دارد بہ بر
می دہد موجش ز طوفانی خبر
زندہ و پایندہ بی نان تنور
میرد آن ساعت کہ گردد بی حضور
چون چراغ اندر شبستان بدن
روشن از وی خلوت و ہم انجمن
اینچنین دل ، خود نگر ، اﷲ مست
جز بہ درویشی نمے آید بدست
ای جوان دامان او محکم بگیر
در غلامی زادہ ئی آزاد میر
*
LAMENT ON THE DIFFERENCES AMONG INDIANS
*

*
O Himalayas! O Attock! O Ganges!

how long shall we go on living sordidly like this ?
 
The old lack insight,
 
the young are devoid of love;
 
East and West are free, but we are slaves of others;
 
our bricks go to the building of others’ mansions. $1

To live according to the wish of others
 
is not deep slumber; it is eternal death;
 
this is not a death that comes from the sky;
 
its seed grows out of the depths of one’s soul. $2
 
Its prey waits neither for the undertaker nor for the grave,

nor for friends from far and near;
 
no clothes are torn in grief over his death,
 
his hell is not on the other side of the skies.
 
Do not seek him among the crowd on the Day of Judgment,
 
his tomorrow lies in his today. $3

What use is there to produce before God one $4
 
who has both sown the seed and reaped the fruit in this world?
 
A nation that does not relish the prodding of desire
 
is wiped off the face of the earth by Nature.
 
It is through magic that the crown and the throne acquire authority $5

what is frail as glass becomes through magic bard as stone.
 
Under the influence of this “clear enchantment,” $6
 
Muslims abjured their faith and unbelievers, their unbelief,
 
The Indians quarrel with one another
 
having revived their old differences,

until a Frankish nation from the land of the West
 
assumed the role of a mediator between Islam and kufr.
 
Nobody knows water from mirage,
 
Revolution, O revolution, O revolution!
 
O you who are always anxious for material sustenance,

ask of God a living heart $7 ;
 
although its seat is in water and clay
 
yet the nine heavens are under its authority.
 
Do not think it belongs to the earth,
 
it really comes from the highest heavens.

The world is for it the Friend’s abode
 
and gets the Friend’s smell from the tulip’s tunic.
 
It is constantly at war with the world,
 
the stones on the path are broken to pieces by its strokes;
 
it is familiar with the pulpit and the gibbet,

and keeps a strict watch over its own fire;
 
it is only a streamlet but has oceans in its lap,
 
its ripples bring tidings of storms;
 
it is not by bread that it lives,
 
it dies as soon as it loses its vision of the Truth;

it is like a lamp in the dark chamber of the body:
 
it illumines both multitude and solitude.
 
Such a heart, ever watchful of itself and God-intoxicated,
 
is not achieved except through Faqr.
 
O young man, catch hold of its skirt firmly,

you have been born in slavery, now live free.
*
1. (II. 595-600). Iqbal speaks of India of his days, his native land, with great anguish. in Payam-i M’ashriq, while addressing Amanullah, the then king of Afghanistan, he gives vent to this agony which the Muslims were then experiencing.

2. (ii. 603-04). “Death from the sky” means natural death. “Death from the depth of the heart” means spiritual death as a result of wrong ideological affiliations.

3. These verses (605-10) describe the state of spiritual death and there-fore the ceremonies usually performed on the natural death of a person are not performed on this occasion.

4. The idea that those who work for gain in this life only will be given their reward here, is based on the following verse of the Qur’an, xvii. 18: “Whoso desires this transitory life, We hasten to him therein what we please. . . .“ After death, he will be deprived of the opportunity to experience Beatific Vision.

5. Magic, sahiri, enchantment. Iqbal calls (Bang-i Dara, p. 295) imperialism as sahiri [If ever subjects from their sleep, half rose themselves, the sure, enchantment of their rulers steep, their wits in dreams once more. . . .] Eng. trans. by V. Kiernan, Poems from Iqbal.

6. Clear enchantment, sehr-i mubin. See the Qur’an, v. 110, where this phrase is used about Jesus’ prophetic mission and his miracles, as interpreted by the unbelievers.

7. “Heart.” Iqbal has written much about it. In one place, he says: Armaghan-i Hijaz, p. 168 [You say that heart is of earth and blood, is caught in this created world’s snare. Although our heart is within our breast, it belongs to a sphere beyond this world of ours.]
*

*

*