مسافر وارد میشود بہ شہر کابل و حاضر میشود بحضور اعلیحضرت شہید
*
شہر کابل خطۂ جنت نظیر
آب حیوان از رگ تاکش بگیر
چشم صائب از سوادش سرمہ چین
روشن و پایندہ باد آن سر زمین
در ظلام شب سمن زارش نگر
بر بساط سبزہ می غلطد سحر
آن دیار خوش سواد ، آن پاک بوم
باد او خوشتر ز باد شام و روم
آب او براق و خاکش تابناک
زندہ از موج نسیمش ، مردہ خاک
ناید اندر حرف و صوت اسرار او
آفتابان خفتہ در کہسار او
ساکنانش سیر چشم و خوش گہر
مثل تیغ از جوھر خود بی خبر
قصر سلطانی کہ نامش دلگشاست
زائران را گرد راہش کیمیاست
شاہ را دیدم در آن کاخ بلند
پیش سلطانی فقیری دردمند
خلق او اقلیم دلہا را گشود
رسم و آئین ملوک آنجا نبود
من حضور آن شہ والا گہر
بینوا مردی بہ دربار عمر
جانم از سوز کلامش در گداز
دست او بوسیدم از راہ نیاز
پادشاہی خوش کلام و سادہ پوش
سخت کوش و نرم خوی و گرم جوش
صدق و اخلاص از نگاہش آشکار
دین و دولت از وجودش استوار
خاکی و از نوریان پاکیزہ تر
از مقام فقر و شاہی باخبر
در نگاہش روزگار شرق و غرب
حکمت او راز دار شرق و غرب
شہر یاری چون حکیمان نکتہ دان
رازدان مد و جزر امتان
پردہ ہا از طلعت معنی گشود
نکتہ ہای ملک و دین را وانمود
گفت ’’از آن آتش کہ داری در بدن
من ترا دانم عزیز خویشتن
ہر کہ او را از محبت رنگ و بوست
در نگاہم ہاشم و محمود اوست‘‘
در حضور آن مسلمان کریم
ہدیہ آوردم ز قرآن عظیم
گفتم ’’این سرمایۂ اہل حق است
در ضمیر او حیات مطلق است
اندرو ہر ابتدا را انتہا است
حیدر از نیروی او خیبر گشاست‘‘
نشۂ حرفم بخون او دوید
دانہ دانہ اشک از چشمش چکید
گفت ’’نادر در جہان بیچارہ بود
از غم دین و وطن آوارہ بود
کوہ و دشت از اضطرابم بیخبر
از غمان بی حسابم بے خبر
نالہ با بانگ ہزار آمیختم
اشک با جوی بہار آمیختم
غیر قرآن غمگسار من نبود
قوتش ہر باب را بر من گشود‘‘
گفتگوے خسرو والا نژاد
باز با من جذبۂ سرشار داد
وقت عصر آمد صدای الصلوت
آن کہ مؤمن را کند پاک از جہات
انتہای عاشقان سوز و گداز
کردم اندر اقتدای او نماز
رازہای آن قیام و آن سجود
جز بہ بزم محرمان نتوان گشود
*
THE TRAVELLER ENTERS KABUL AND VISITS THE MAUSOLEUM OF THE LATE MARTYR KING
*

*
The city of Kabul, its clime resembling paradise. 
You get the Water of Life from the vein of its grapes 
the eye of poet acquires collyrium from its precincts.
May that land be glorious and prosperous
Observe its jesamine beds in the darkness of night. 
you would say as if the dawn tolls on the carpet of its grass.
That city with the lovely climes in that hallowed land, 
its breeze is far better than that of Syria and Rome. 
Its water so glittering and earth radiant, 
the dead earth springs into life with its pleasant draughts.
Its excellence cannot fall into the grasp of words or expressions,
suns upon suns lapped in sleep in its mountains; 
its inhabitants complacent and genial, 
unware of their worth like a sword.
The royal palace named Dilkusha (Heart-Ease).
the dust on its way is like alchemy for those who come to it. 
I met the king in his Ifty place
a poor faqir in the presence of a monarch.
His courteous nature opened wide the partals of hearts,
nothing in the way of ways and formalities of kings. 
This humble one in the presence of that noble king 
was like an insignificant person in the court of ‘Umar’ the great Caliph.
My heart melted with the warmth of his words,
I kissed his hand out of humility.
A king pleasant of speech and plainly clad, 
hard in striving, mild of nature and warm-hearted. 
Sincerity and frankness apparent from his locks. 
Both Faith and realm firm in his person.
Of earth earthly but purer than angels;
Aware of both modesty and kingship. 
In his sight the affairs of both East and West; 
his sagacity knowing their secrets alike. 
A king knowing subtle matters well like a sage 
knowing the causes of rise and fall of nations. 

He lifted veils from the (missing)
# translation missing

He said with the fire that you have in the body,
I hold you as dear as my own son. 
Anyone who bears scent and hue of love 
is like Hashim and Mahmud in my eyes. 
To that repspectable Muslim
I presented a gift of the glorious Qur’an 
I said this is the whole and sole substance for the people of Truth;
it contains the very essence of life in all its absoluteness.
Therein is the endpoint of all beginnings.
By virtue of it, Haider threw open the gate of Khaiber.
The intensity of my words ran into his blood.
and tears upon tears trickled from his eyes in serried train.
He said, “I, Nadir, was a helpless one 
bewildered because of the sad plight of the Religion and Nation;
hills and plains were unaware of my perturbation, 
ignorant of my boundless sorrows.
I raised thousand cries with the note of the nightingale 
mixing my tears with the stream aflow in spring. 
I had no solace except that of the Qur’an; 
it powers opened all doors to me.”
The words of that king of high lineage 
caused again an upsurge in me.
The call of noon prayer arose awhile 
which rids a believer of all limits. 
The climax of ardent love is nothing but intense feeling,
so I performed the prayer in his lead. 
The secret of that standing and prostrating 
cannot be told except to thode who are close associates.
*

*

*

*