غرہ شوال
*
غرہء شوال! اے نور نگاہ روزہ دار
آ کہ تھے تيرے ليے مسلم سراپا انتظار
تيري پيشاني پہ تحرير پيام عيد ہے
شام تيري کيا ہے ، صبح عيش کي تميد ہے
سرگزشت ملت بيضا کا تو آئينہ ہے
اے مہ نو! ہم کو تجھ سے الفت ديرينہ ہے
جس علم کے سائے ميں تيغ آزما ہوتے تھے ہم
دشمنوں کے خون سے رنگيں قبا ہوتے تھے ہم
تيري قسمت ميں ہم آغوشي اسي رايت کي ہے
حسن روز افزوں سے تيرے آبرو ملت کي ہے
آشنا پرور ہے قوم اپني ، وفا آئيں ترا
ہے محبت خيز يہ پيراہن سيميں ترا
اوج گردوں سے ذرا دنيا کي بستي ديکھ لے
!اپني رفعت سے ہمارے گھر کي پستي ديکھ لے
قافلے ديکھ اور ان کي برق رفتاري بھي ديکھ
رہر و درماندہ کي منزل سے بيزاري بھي ديکھ
ديکھ کر تجھ کو افق پر ہم لٹاتے تھے گہر
اے تہي ساغر! ہماري آج ناداري بھي ديکھ
فرقہ آرائي کي زنجيروں ميں ہيں مسلم اسير
اپني آزادي بھي ديکھ ، ان کي گرفتاري بھي ديکھ
ديکھ مسجد ميں شکست رشتہ تسبيح شيخ
بت کدے ميں برہمن کي پختہ زناري بھي ديکھ
کافروں کي مسلم آئيني کا بھي نظارہ کر
اور اپنے مسلموں کي مسلم آزاري بھي ديکھ
بارش سنگ حوادث کا تماشائي بھي ہو
امت مرحوم کي آئينہ ديواري بھي ديکھ
ہاں ، تملق پيشگي ديکھ آبرو والوں کي تو
اور جو بے آبرو تھے ، ان کي خود داري بھي ديکھ
جس کو ہم نے آشنا لطف تکلم سے کيا
اس حريف بے زباں کي گرم گفتاري بھي ديکھ
ساز عشرت کي صدا مغرب کے ايوانوں ميں سن
اور ايراں ميں ذرا ماتم کي تياري بھي ديکھ
چاک کر دي ترک ناداں نے خلافت کي قبا
سادگي مسلم کي ديکھ ، اوروں کي عياري بھي ديکھ
صورت آئينہ سب کچھ ديکھ اور خاموش رہ
شورش امروز ميں محو سرود دوش رہ
*
THE EID CRESCENT
*
Celebration of festivals in Islam is not an occasion for raveling but one of reminiscence and stock taking. The sight of the Eid crescent produced similar thought in ‘Allamah Iqbal’s mind. He took stock of the state of the Muslim Ummah and recounted some of it’s misfortunes. He has given some more reasons for downfall of the Muslims in addition to those given in the pervious poem. However, the next poem, i.e. 99. Sham‘a Awr Sha‘ir (The Candle and the Poet) and 103. Jawab-i-Shakwah (The Response to the Complaint) give more details of this tragedy.
*
O the pride of Shawwal $1 ! O the fasting person’s darling!
Come ! As Muslims were very anxiously waiting for you

The message of Eid is written on your forehead
Your evening is the preface to the dawn of pleasure

You are the mirror of the history of Millat-i-BaiÉah $2
O crescent ! We are your lovers since a very long time

The banner 3 under whose shade we wielded our swords
Under whose shade we used the blood of our enemies

The companionship of this very banner $3 is your destiny
The Millat’s honor is by your ever-increasing beauty

Our nation is cherisher of friends, fidelity is your way
This silvery shirt of yours is the propagator of love

Look at the earth’s habitation from your celestial apses!
Look at the depth of our abode from your eminence!

Look at the caravans and also look at their fast speed
At the destitute traveler’s estrangement with destination also look

On sighting you we used to give charity lavishly
O empty cup ! Today at our indigence also look

Muslims are tightly bound in chains of sectarianism
Look at your freedom and at their bondage also look

In the mosque look at disintegration of the priest’s love
In the temple at the Brahman’s strong idol-worship also look

Look at the sight of the Muslim ways in the infidels’ life
And at your Muslims’ tormenting other Muslims also look

Be the spectator of the shower of rocks of misfortunes
At the frailty of the Muslims Ummah’s abodes also look

Yes, look at the advance flattery of the ‘honorable’ people
And at the self-respect of the formerly shameless people also look

Whom we got acquainted with the taste of eloquence
At the haughty speech of that former speechless adversary look

Listen to sounds of pleasurable orchestra in West’s palaces
And at the preparations for the mourning in Iran $4 also look

The imprudent Turk has torn the cloak of the Divine Khilafah $5
Look at Muslims’ simplicity at other’s cunningness also look

Look at everything, and remain quiet like a mirror
In today tumult remain occupied in evening’s music! $6
*
1. Shawwal - The tenth month of the Hijra calendar on the first day of which ‘¢id al-Fièr is celebrated.

2. Allusion to the egg-shaped radiant mark on the palm of S. Musa A.S., which was bestowed on him by God (The Holy Qur’an 7: 108). ‘Allamah Iqbal calls the Muslim Ummah as “Millat-i-Baiza” because he is confident of the rise of Islam in the world.

3. Allusion to the inclusion of the crescent on the flags of Muslim countries as an insignia of Islam and its rising power.

4. Allusion to the poor condition of Iran at the time this poem was written. This called for collective bereavement, in contrast with the condition of the West, described in the first hemistich.

5. Reference to Musèafa Kamal Pasha (1881-1938 C.E.) who was the famous post-war founder of present-day Turkey and it’s first dictator and president. He was a trained soldier and earned the rank of a hero in Turkish history. His hard and bold military actions before, during and after World War I in the pursuit of protecting Turkey against the political intrigues as well as military onslaughts of the Western Allied Powers has earned a high place for him. However, after assuming political power after World War I, he abolished the Uthmaniya Khilafah in 1924, which exposed him to the anger of sincere Muslims all over the world who wanted to restore Islam to its pristine purity and grandeur after freeing the Muslim world from the clutches of Western Powers. ‘Allamah Iqbal is one of this group of Muslims whose heart was grieved by the abolition of the Khilafah. Though the political and economic weakness of the Uthmania Khilafah, before, during and after the First World War cannot be denied, nor can the existence of corruption and inefficiency which led to that state of affairs. However , the Institution of Khilafah, in spite of its defects and shortcomings, was providing some degree of unity to the Muslim Ummah and was giving it the colour of a super-national political entity. This was lost by its abolition and the Muslim Ummah was divided into secular nation states whose evils we are seeing now. By this act Mustafa Kamal also tarnished his own image among the Muslim Ummah, a name which he had earned by extremely heroic deeds in defense of the Khilafah before, during and after World War I. So by abolition of the Khilafah , Mustafa Kamal deprived Islam and the Muslim Ummah of its rightful place of being the only super-national entity, as well as tarnished his own image in Muslim History. It is in this sense that ‘Allamah Iqbal calls him “imprudent Turk”.

6. In this verse ‘Allamah Iqbal is providing sane advice to the Muslim Ummah for its revival in the form of advice to the Eid crescent.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-23.mp3
*

Gurrah-e-Shawwal! Ae Noor-e-Nigah-e-Rozadar

Aa Ke The Tere Liye Muslim Sarapa Intizar

Teri Peshani Pe Tehreer-e-Payam-e-Eid Hai

Sham Teri Kya Hai, Subah-e-Aysh Ki Tamheed Hai

Sargazasht-e-Millat-e-Baiza Ka Tu Aaeena Hai

Ae Mah-e-Nau! Hum Ko Tujh Se Ulfat-e-Dairina Hai

Jis Ilm Ke Saye Mein Taigh Azma Hote The Hum

Dushmanon Ke Khoon Se Rangeen Qaba Hote The Hum

Teri Qismat Mein Hum Aghoshi Ussu Raayat Ki Hai

Husn-e-Roz Afzoon Se Tere Aabru Millat Ki Hai

Ashana Parwar Hai Qoum Apni, Wafa Aaeen Tera

Hai Muhabbat Khaiz Ye Pairhan-e-Seemeen Tera

Auj-e-Gurdoon Se Zara Dunya Ki Basti Dekh Le

Apni Riffat Se Humare Ghar Ki Pasti Dekh Le!

Qafle Dekh Aur Un Ki Barq Raftari Bhi Dekh

Rahru-e-Darmandah Ki Manzil Se Bezari Bhi Dekh

Dekh Kar Tujh Ko Ufaq Par Hum Lutate The Guhar

Ae Tehi Saghar! Humari Aaj Nadari Bhi Dekh

Firqa Aarayi Ki Zanjeeron Mein Hain Muslim Aseer

Apni Azadi Bhi Dekh, Un Ki Giraftari Bhi Dekh

Dekh Masjid Mein Shikast-e-Rishta-e-Tasbeeh-e-Sheikh

But Kade Mein Barhaman Ki Pukhta Zunnari Bhi Dekh

Kafiron Ki Muslim Aaeeni Ka Bhi Nazara Kar

Aur Apne Muslamon Ki Muslim Aazari Bhi Dekh

Barish-e-Sang-e-Hawadis Ka Tamashayi Bhi Ho

Ummat-e-Marhoom Ki Aaeena Deewari Bhi Dekh

Haan, Tamlluq Paishgi Dekh Aabru Walon Ki Tu

Aur Jo Be-Aabu The, Un Ki Khuddari Bhi Dekh

Jis Ko Hum Ne Ashna Lutf-e-Takallum Se Kiya

Uss Hareef-e-Bezuban Ki Garm Guftari Bhi Dekh

Saaz-e-Ishrat Ki Sada Magrib Ke Aewanon Mein Sun

Aur Iran Mein Zara Matam Ki Tayyari Bhi Dekh

Chaak Kar Di Turk-e-Nadan Ne Khilafat Ki Qaba

Sadgi Muslim Ki Dekh, Auron Ki Ayyari Bhi Dekh

Soorat-e-Aaeena Sub Kuch Dekh Aur Khamosh Reh

Sourish-e-Amroz Mein Mehw-e-Surood-e-Dosh Reh
*
