دعا
*
يا رب! دل مسلم کو وہ زندہ تمنا دے
جو قلب کو گرما دے ، جو روح کو تڑپا دے
پھر وادي فاراں کے ہر ذرے کو چمکا دے
پھر شوق تماشا دے، پھر ذوق تقاضا دے
محروم تماشا کو پھر ديدئہ بينا دے
ديکھا ہے جو کچھ ميں نے اوروں کو بھي دکھلا دے
بھٹکے ہوئے آہو کو پھر سوئے حرم لے چل
اس شہر کے خوگر کو پھر وسعت صحرا دے
پيدا دل ويراں ميں پھر شورش محشر کر
اس محمل خالي کو پھر شاہد ليلا دے
اس دور کي ظلمت ميں ہر قلب پريشاں کو
وہ داغ محبت دے جو چاند کو شرما دے
رفعت ميں مقاصد کو ہمدوش ثريا کر
خودداري ساحل دے، آزادي دريا دے
بے لوث محبت ہو ، بے باک صداقت ہو
سينوں ميں اجالا کر، دل صورت مينا دے
احساس عنايت کر آثار مصيبت کا
امروز کي شورش ميں انديشہء فردا دے
ميں بلبل نالاں ہوں اک اجڑے گلستاں کا
!تاثير کا سائل ہوں ، محتاج کو ، داتا دے
*
THE SUPPLICATION
*
This very beautiful and forceful poem describes the ardent desire of ‘Allamah Iqbal for the rejuvenation of the Muslim Ummah, starting with their return to Islam and to the Love of God. This poem is very popular among the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistan-Bangladesh sub-continent and is often committed to memory.
*
O Lord! To the Muslim’s heart grant that live Longing
Which may warm the heart, which may restlessness to the soul grant

Again brighten up every speck of dust of the Valley of Faran
Again Longing for the Spectacle, taste for the asking grant $1

Again to the one deprived of the Spectacle the discerning eye grant
Whatever I have seen, to others also its sight grant

Again guide the strayed away deer towards the Haram $2
To the one addicted to city, vastness of wilderness grant

Again in the forlorn heart create the Last Day’s tumult
Again to this empty camel-litter the lover of Lailah grant

In the darkness of this age to every perturbed heart
That mark of Love which may embarrass the moon grant

In elegance raise the Muslims’ goals to the level of Thurayyah
Self-respect of the ocean, freedom of the sea shore grant

Love should be pure, candor fearless should be
Grant Light to hearts, hearts like crystal grant

Grant the feeling for signs of the calamity
In today’s tumult concern for tomorrow grant

I am the wailing nightingale of a ruined rose garden
I am the supplicant for acceptance, O Benevolent one alms to the beggar grant
*
1. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 7:142-145, particularly 143, in which the longing of S. Musa A.S. to witness the countenance of God is described.

2. This is a metaphor for the Muslim Ummah having gone astray and supplication to guide them to the right path.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-34.mp3
*



Ya Rab! Dil-e-Muslim Ko Woh Zinda Tamana De

Jo Qalb Ko Garma De, Jo Rooh Ko Tarpa De


Phir Wadi-e-Faran Ke Har Zarre Ko Chamka De

Phir Shauq-e-Tamasha De, Phir Zauq-e-Taqaza


Mehroom-e-Tamasha Ko Phir Dida-e-Beena De

Dekha Hai Jo Kuch Mein Ne Auron Ko Bhi Dikhla De


Bhatke Huway Aahu Ko Phir Soo’ay Haram Le Chal

Iss Sheher Ke Khugar Ko Phir Wusaat-e-Sehra De


Paida Dil-e-Weeran Mein Phir Shaurish-e-Mehshar Kar

Iss Mehmil-e-Khali Ko Phir Shahid-e-Laila De


Iss Dour Ki Zulmat Mein Har Qalb-e-Preshan Ko

Woh Dagh-e-Mohabbat De Jo Chand Ko Sharma De


Riffat Mein Maqasid Ko Humdosh-e-Surraya Kar

Khuddari-e-Sahil De, Azadi-e-Darya De


Be Lous Mohabbat Ho, Bebak Sadaqat Ho

Seenon Mein Ujala Kar, Dil Soorat-e-Meena De


Ehsas Anayat Kar Asaar-e-Mosibat Ka

Amroz Ki Shuarish Mein Andesha-e-Farda De


Main Bulbul-e-Nalan Hun Ek Ujre Gulistan Ka

Taseer Ka Saa’il Hun, Mauhtaj Ko, Data De!

*
