ارتقا
*
ستيزہ کار رہا ہے ازل سے تا امروز
چراغ مصطفوي سے شرار بولہبي
حيات شعلہ مزاج و غيور و شور انگيز
سرشت اس کي ہے مشکل کشي، جفا طلبي
سکوت شام سے تا نغمہ سحر گاہي
ہزار مرحلہ ہائے فعان نيم شبي
کشا کش زم و گرما، تپ و تراش و خراش
ز خاک تيرہ دروں تا بہ شيشہ حلبي
مقام بست و شکت و فشار و سوز و کشيد
ميان قطرئہ نيسان و آتش عنبي
اسي کشاکش پيہم سے زندہ ہيں اقوام
يہي ہے راز تب و تاب ملت عربي
مغاں کہ دانہء انگور آب مي سازند ''
''ستارہ مي شکنند، آفتاب مي سازند
*
EVOLUTION
*
This poem, though named Irtiqa or “Evolution” does not deal with the Darwinian theory of evolution. Also, “struggle for existence and survival of the fittest” which are important pillars on which this theory rests do not form the thesis of this poem. The central idea of the poem is that perfection is attained by struggle and going through trials and tribulations. It starts with the basic concept that the struggle between evil and virtue is eternal and perpetual. This is a very great consolation and a beacon of light for those engaged in the struggle for the Truth. Each subsequent verse deals with the method of perfection of one’s objects and details the procedure of struggle and hardships through which one has to go before attaining perfection. This theme is so dear to ‘Allamah Iqbal that his works are replete with this idea to the extent that it can be called the raison d’etre for his efforts. Cf.

(205) The life not fired with the desire for revolution death is
The struggle for revolution essence for nations’ life is.

It must also be understood that the purpose of adopting this theme was to infuse a new spirit in the dead body of the Muslim Ummah during the period of the lowest ebb in its history.
*
Struggle has continued from eternity till the present day
Between the lamp of Musèafa $1 and the spark of Bu Lahab $2

Life is flame-tempered, high-minded and fervent
It’s nature is resolving difficulty, bearing cruelty

From the evening’s quietude till the morning’s song
There are many a stage of the midnight wailing!

Struggle exists between the heat and cold, throbbing and shaping
From the dark dust to the polished glass of Halab $3 !

The phenomena of making and breaking, squeezing, heating and distilling
Exist between the drop of spring rain and the heat of the grape wine!

Nations live by this continuous struggle alone
This alone is the secret of the Arab nation’s struggle $4 !

“The tavern-keepers making wine from the grape
Break the stars and construct the sun”
*
1. Musèafa- The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)

2. Abu Lahab- He was one of the uncles of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) but was still one of the strongest enemies of him and of Islam.

3. Halab- Halab or Aleppo was a famous place for the manufacture of quality glassware.

4. Millat-i-`Araba- This refers to the early Muslims who struggled incessantly in the cause of God.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-44.mp3
*


Staiza Kaar Raha Hai Azal Se Ta Amroz

Charagh-e- Mustafavi (S.A.W.) Se Sharar-e-Bu-Lahbi

Hayat Shaola Mazaj-o-Ghayoor-o-Shor Angaiz

Sarisht Iss Ki Hai Muskhil-Kashi, Jafa-Talbi

Sukoot-e-Shaam Se Ta Naghma-e-Sehargahi

Hazar Marhala Haye Faghan-e-Neem-Shabi

Kasha-Kashe Zam-o-Garma, Tab-o-Tarash-o-Kharash

Za-Khak-e-Teer Darun Ta Ba Sheesha-e-Jalbi

Maqam-e-Bast-o-Shikast-o-Fashar-o-Souz-o-Kasheed

Mayan-e-Qatra-e-Neesan-o-Aatish-e-Ghibi

Issi Kasha-Kash-e-Peham Se Zinda Hain Aqwam

Yehi Hai Raaz-e-Tab-o-Taab-e-Millat-e-Arabi

“Maghan Ke Dana-e-Angoor Aab Mee Sazand

Sitara Mee Shaknand, Aftab Mee Saazand”
*
