فردوس ميں ايک مکالمہ
*
ہاتف نے کہا مجھ سے کہ فردوس ميں اک روز
حالي سے مخاطب ہوئے يوں سعدي شيراز
اے آنکہ ز نور گہر نظم فلک تاب
!دامن بہ چراغ مہ اختر زدہ اي باز
کچھ کيفيت مسلم ہندي تو بياں کر
واماندئہ منزل ہے کہ مصروف تگ و تاز
مذہب کي حرارت بھي ہے کچھ اس کي رگوں ميں؟
تھي جس کي فلک سوز کبھي گرمي آواز
باتوں سے ہوا شيخ کي حالي متاثر
،رو رو کے لگا کہنے کہ ''اے صاحب اعجاز
جب پير فلک نے ورق ايام کا الٹا
آئي يہ صدا ، پائوگے تعليم سے اعزاز
آيا ہے مگر اس سے عقيدوں ميں تزلزل
دنيا تو ملي، طائر ديں کر گيا پرواز
ديں ہو تو مقاصد ميں بھي پيدا ہو بلندي
فطرت ہے جوانوں کي زميں گير زميں تاز
مذہب سے ہم آہنگي افراد ہے باقي
ديں زخمہ ہے ، جمعيت ملت ہے اگر ساز
بنياد لرز جائے جو ديوار چمن کي
ظاہر ہے کہ انجام گلستاں کا ہے آغاز
پاني نہ ملا زمزم ملت سے جو اس کو
پيدا ہيں نئي پود ميں الحاد کے انداز
يہ ذکر حضور شہ يثرب ميں نہ کرنا
سمجھيں نہ کہيں ہند کے مسلم مجھے غماز
خرما نتواں يافت ازاں خار کہ کشتيم ''
''ديبا نتواں بافت ازاں پشم کہ رشتيم
*
A CONVERSATION IN PARADISE
*
This is another poem in which ‘Allamah Iqbal’s views about Western education for Muslims have been expressed. See introduction to poem 128, Musalman Awr Ta‘lam-i-Jadad (Muslims and Modern Education).
*
Hatif $1 said to me that in Paradise one day
Sa‘da of Sharaz addressed Hala in this way

“O with the pearl of whose poetry’s sky-illuminating light
The falcon became companion of moon and stars’ light! $2

Relate to me what the story of the Indian Muslim is
Is he lagging at the halt or busy in exertion is?

Is some warmth of dan left in his veins?
The heat of whose call $3 was once burning the sky”

Hala was moved by the talk of the Shaikh
He started weeping and saying, “O man of miracles!

When the sky turned over the leaf of time
The call came that respect was possible only with education!

But this has produced wavering in fundamental beliefs
Secular benefits were obtained, but dan had been undermined

Goals also become exalted if the dan is preserved
The youth’s nature is paralyzed and very low keyed

Concordance among individuals is kept only with dan
Dan is the plectrum if national congregation is the musical instrument

If the foundation of the garden’s wall is shaken
It is clearly the beginning of the garden’s end

As the water of Zamzam $4 was not available to it
Some manner of atheism is appearing in the new progeny

Do not talk of this in the audience of the Lord of Yathrib $5
Lest Muslims of India consider that this is my back-biting”

Dates cannot be obtained from the weeds we have sown
Brocade cannot be obtained from the wool we have spun”
*
1. Hatif- The hidden angel who puts ideas in mind or gives news of the unknown. It may also refer to the famous Irana poet of the period of literary renaissance of Iran.

2. Allusion to Madd-O-Jazr-i-Islam (Rise and Fall of Islam) also known as Musaddas-i-Hala published in 1879. This book is one of the jewels of Urdu literature. It describes in detail the condition of Arabia before the advent of Islam, the virtues of Islam and the blessings it brought to the world in general and the Arabs in particular, the decline and fall of Muslims and their condition during the author’s times. It exhorts Muslims to move forward in the material as well as the ethical and spiritual world. It lays great stress on acquisition of Western knowledge, particularly of science and technology. For this reason Sa‘da is shown in this poem addressing Hala to inquire about the effects of Western education on the Muslim Youth of the Indian sub-continent to whom it was primarily addressed. As is well known Western education did much material good to these Muslims, but also distanced them from their cultural and religious heritage, which was an irreparable loss. Hala, in his reply, expresses his concern for the above unexpected turn of events as is shown in the fifth and subsequent verses.

3. Allusion to the Muslims’ adhan.

4. Zamzam- This is the sacred spring inside the Holy Haram in Makkah Mu‘aïïamah. It dates back to the time of S. Ibraham A.S. which was created miraculously for his wife and infant son S. Isma‘il A.S.

5. Reference to the Holy Prophet S.A.W.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-57.mp3
*


Hatif Ne Kaha Mujh Se Ka Firdous Mein Ek Roz

Haali Se Mukhatib Huwe Yun Saadi-e-Sheeraz

Ae Ankah Za-Noor-e-Guhar-e-Nazam-e-Falak Taab

Daman Ba Charagh-e-Mah-o-Akhtar Zada Aee Baaz!

Kuch Kaifiat-e-Muslim-e-Hindi To Bayan Kar

Wa Mandah-e-Manzil Hai Ke Masroof-e-Tag-o-Taaz

Mazhab Ki Hararat Bhi Hai Kuch Iss Ki Ragon Mein?

Thi Jis Ki Falak Souz Kabhi Garmi-e-Awaz

Baaton Se Huwa Sheikh Ki Haali Mutasir

Ro Ro Ke Laga Kehne K "Ae Sahib-e-Ijaz

Jab Peer-e-Falak Ne Waraq-e-Ayyam Ka Ulta

Ayi Ye Sada, Pao Ge Taleem Se Azaaz

Aya Hai Magar Iss Se Aqeedaton Mein Tazalzal

Dunya To Mili, Taeer-e-Deen Kar Gya Parwaz

Deen Ho To Maqasid Mein Bhi Paida Ho Bulandi

Fitrat Hai Jawanon Ki Zameen-Geer, Zameen Taza

Mazhab Se Hum Ahangi-e-Afrad Hai Baqi

Deen Zakhma Hai, Jamiat-e-Millat Hai Agar Saaz

Bunyad Laraz Jaye Jo Deewar-e-Chaman Ki

Zahir Hai Ke Anjaam-e-Gulistan Ka Hai Aghaz

Pani Na Mila Zamzam-e-Millat Se Jo Iss Ko

Paida Hain Nayi Poud Mein Ilhaad Ke Andaz

Ye Zikr Huzoor-e- Shah-e-Yasrab (S.A.W.) Mein Na Karna

Samjhain Na Kahin Hind Ke Muslim Mujhe Ghammaz

‘Khurma Natawan Yafat Azan Khar Ke Kashteeam

Deeba Natawan Bafat Azan Pashem Ke Rashteeam”

*
