جنگ ير موک کاايک واقعہ
*
صف بستہ تھے عرب کے جوانان تيغ بند
تھي منتظر حنا کي عروس زمين شام
اک نوجوان صورت سيماب مضطرب
آ کر ہوا امير عساکر سے ہم کلام
اے بوعبيدہ رخصت پيکار دے مجھے
لبريز ہو گيا مرے صبر و سکوں کو جام
بے تاب ہو رہا ہوں فراق رسول ميں
اک دم کي زندگي بھي محبت ميں ہے حرام
جاتا ہوں ميں حضور رسالت پناہ ميں
لے جائوں گا خوشي سے اگر ہو کوئي پيام
يہ ذوق و شوق ديکھ کے پرنم ہوئي وہ آنکھ
جس کي نگاہ تھي صفت تيغ بے نيام
بولا امير فوج کہ ''وہ نوجواں ہے تو
پيروں پہ تيرے عشق کا واجب ہے احترام
پوري کرے خدائے محمد تري مراد
!کتنا بلند تيري محبت کا ہے مقام
پہنچے جو بارگاہ رسول اميں ميں تو
کرنا يہ عرض ميري طرف سے پس از سلام
ہم پہ کرم کيا ہے خدائے غيور نے
پورے ہوئے جو وعدے کيے تھے حضور نے
*
AN INCIDENT OF THE BATTLE OF YARMUK
*
This poem refers to the battle of Yarmuk waged during the Khilafah of S. ‘Umar Faruq R.A. (636) at Yarmuk against the Byzantine wing of the Roman Empire. The battle was fought between the flowers of both armies. The Roman army was a well trained, well equipped and well organized body of 300,00 men. The Muslim army was hardly 46,000 men strong and was neither well equipped nor well trained. However, as the story related in this poem states, every soldier in the Islamic army was full of zeal for fighting in the cause of God. There was no pessimism and the Islamic formula of ghaza or shahad (conqueror or martyr) operated. The “young man” in the second verse was just a soldier and his conversation with S. Abu ‘Ubaidah R.A., the commander portrays the general spirit and zeal of the whole army for fighting in whom even being slain in the cause of God was considered supreme success. Every person in the Muslim army was full of that level of zeal.
*
The armed Arab youth were arrayed for battle
The bride of Syria’s land was waiting for myrtle $1

A young man who was restless like mercury
Approaching the army’s general started saying

“O Abu ‘Ubaidah $2 grant me permission to fight
The cup of my patience and calm is full

I am becoming impatient in the Holy Prophet’s separation
In his Love even a moment’s life has become hard

As I am going to the Holy Prophet’s audience
I shall gladly convey if there is any message”

The general’s eye, whose sight was like an un-sheathed sword,
Noticing this zeal and fervor was moist with tears

The army’s general exclaimed., “You are that young man
The respect for whose Love is binding on the elders

May the God of Muhammad fulfill your wish
How elegant is the stage of your Love!

When you arrive in the audience of the Holy Prophet
Present this petition with my sincere compliments

“The Exalted God has shown His Mercy to us
Have been fulfilled all the promises you had made to us” $3
*
1. This metaphor for blood is used for the blood about to be shed in the battle.

2. Abu ‘Ubaidah ibn-Jarrah- He was an eminent companion of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and was among those who joined him early. He took part in the fateful Battle of Badr and continued fighting for the cause of God all his life. He is famous for his services to Islam during the Khilafahs of S. Abu Bakr Siddaq R.A. and S.‘Umar Faruq R.A.

3. This verse refers to the Holy Qur’an 2:155-157 read with 33:9-27. Unfavorable circumstances and adversity test the mettle of a person, and sort out the hypocrites from the sincere believers. The attitude of the former is portrayed in 33:9-21 and that of the latter in 33:22-27, particularly 33:22 .
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-59.mp3
*


Saf Basta The Arab Ke Jawanan-e-Taeghband

Thi Muntazir Hina Ki Uroos-e-Zameen-e-Shaam

Ek Naujawan Soorat-e-Seemab Muztarib

Aa Kar Huwa Ameer-e-Asakar Se Hum Kalam

Ae Bu-Ubaidah (R.A.) Rukhsat-e-Paikaar De Mujhe

Labraiz Ho Gya Mere Sabr-o-Sakoon Ka Jaam

Be Taab Ho Raha Hun Mein Firaaq-e- Rasool (S.A.W.) Mein

Ek Dam Ki Zindagi Bhi Mohabbat Mein Hai Haraam

Jata Hun Mein Huzoor-e-Risalat Panah (S.A.W.) Mein

Le Jaun Ga Khushi Se Agar Ho Koi Peyam

Ye Zauq-o-Shauq Dekh Kar Purnam Huwi Woh Ankh

Jis Ki Nigah Thi Safat-e-Taegh-e-Benayam

Bola Ameer-e-Fouj Ke “Woh Naujawan Hai Tu

Peeron Pet Ere Ishq Ka Wajib Hai Ehtaram

Pure Kare Khuda’ay Muhammad (S.A.W.) Teri Murad

Kitna Buland Teri Mohabbat Ka Hai Maqam!

Pohanche Jo Bargah-e- Rasool-e-Ameen (S.A.W.)   Mein Tu

Karna Ye Arz Meri Taraf Se Pas Az Salam

Hum Par Karam Kiya Hai Khuda’ay Ghayoor Ne
Puray Huwe Jo Wade Kiye The Huzoor (S.A.W.) Ne
*
