اے باد صبا! کملي والے سے جا کہيو پيغام مرا
*
اے باد صبا! کملي والے سے جا کہيو پيغام مرا
قبضے سے امت بيچاري کے ديں بھي گيا، دنيا بھي گئي
يہ موج پريشاں خاطر کو پيغام لب ساحل نے ديا
!ہے دور وصال بحر بھي، تو دريا ميں گھبرا بھي گئي
عزت ہے محبت کي قائم اے قيس! حجاب محمل سے
محمل جو گيا عزت بھي گئي، غيرت بھي گئي ليلا بھي گئي
کي ترک تگ و دو قطرے نے تو آبروئے گوہر بھي ملي
آوارگي فطرت بھي گئي اور کشمکش دريا بھي گئي
نکلي تو لب اقبال سے ہے، کيا جانيے کس کي ہے يہ صدا
پيغام سکوں پہنچا بھي گئي ، دل محفل کا تڑپا بھي گئي
*
O ZEPHYR! CONVEY MY MESSAGE TO THE ONE WRAPPED IN BLANKET
*
This ghazal expresses ‘Allamah Iqbal’s deep concern over the poor condition of the Muslim Ummah in material as well as spiritual spheres. It starts with a request to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) for supplication to God and passes to the message of activism for the Ummah.
*
O zephyr! Convey my message to the one wrapped in blanket $1
The poor Ummah has lost both dan and material resources

The river bank gave this message to the restless wave
“Union with ocean is still far and you have already lost patience in the river”

O Qais! Love’s honor is made durable with litter’s curtain
If litter is lost, glory, honor as well as Lailah is lost!

Though the drop got pearl’s dignity by abandoning struggle
It lost taste for wandering and struggle in the river

Though this voice has emerged from Iqbal’s lips its source is unknown
The assembly got hope’s message as well as became restless for activism
*
1. The word in the original is “One wrapped in a small blanket”. This is the title of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) as a mark of affection and is based on such affection shown by no less an entity than God in the opening verses of the Holy Qur’an, Surahs 73 and 74.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-71-1.mp3
*


Ae Bad-e-Saba! Kamli Wale (S.A.W.) Se Ja Kehiyo Pegham Mera

Qabze Se Ummat Bechari Ke Deen Bhi Gya, Dunya Bhi Gyi

Ye Mouj-e-Pareeshan  Khatar Ko Pegham Lab-e-Sahil Ne Diya

Hai Door Wisaal-e-Behar Abhi, Tu Darya Mein Ghabra Bhi Gyi!

Izzat Hai Mohabbat Ki Qaeem Ae Qais! Hijab-e-Mehmil Se

Mehmil Jo Gya Izzat Bhi Gyi, Ghairat Bhi Gyi, Laila Bhi Gyi

Ki Tark Tag-o-Dou Qatre Ne To Abruye Gohar Bhi Mili

Awargi-e-Fitrat Bhi Gyi Aur Kashmakash-e-Darya Bhi Gyi

Nikli To Lab-e-Iqbal Se Hai, Kya Janiye Kis Ki Hai Ye Sada

Pegham-e-Sukoon Pohancha Bhi Gyi, Dil Mehfil Ka Tarpa Bhi Gyi
*
