ترانہء ہندي
*
سارے جہاں سے اچھا ہندوستاں ہمارا
ہم بلبليں ہيں اس کي، يہ گلستاں ہمارا
غربت ميں ہوں اگر ہم، رہتا ہے دل وطن ميں
سمجھو وہيں ہميں بھي، دل ہو جہاں ہمارا
پربت وہ سب سے اونچا، ہمسايہ آسماں کا
وہ سنتري ہمارا، وہ پاسباں ہمارا
گودي ميں کھيلتي ہيں اس کي ہزاروں ندياں
گلشن ہے جن کے دم سے رشک جناں ہمارا
اے آب رود گنگا، وہ دن ہيں ياد تجھ کو؟
اترا ترے کنارے جب کارواں ہمارا
مذہب نہيں سکھاتا آپس ميں بير رکھنا
ہندي ہيں ہم وطن ہے ہندوستاں ہمارا
يونان و مصر و روما سب مٹ گئے جہاں سے
اب تک مگر ہے باقي نام و نشاں ہمارا
کچھ بات ہے کہ ہستي مٹتي نہيں ہماري
صديوں رہا ہے دشمن دور زماں ہمارا
اقبال! کوئي محرم اپنا نہيں جہاں ميں
معلوم کيا کسي کو درد نہاں ہمارا
*
AN ODE TO INDIA
*
This beautiful poem is what its name shows. This and some other similar poems do not indicate ‘Allamah Iqbal's belief in secular nationalism even early in his life. ‘Allamah Iqbal's political philosophy is based on the Islam's concept of nationalism on the basis of ideology and not geographical boundaries. Love of the homeland is a quality in Islam but not making it the basis of the State, as has been done by the West. In other poems he has explained his political philosophy and has shown the evils of secular nationalism. One such poem is 85. "Waèaniyat" (Nationhood) in Bang-Dara.
*
Better than the whole world is this India of ours
We are its nightingales, it is the garden of ours

If we are in foreign lands our hearts think of the homeland
Consider us present where this heart of ours is present

The highest mountain, touching the sky
It is our sentinel, it is our watchman $1

Thousands of rivers are playing in its lap are playing
Which make this garden of ours to be the world’s envy

O, The River Ganga’s waters ! Do you remember the day
When our caravan landed at your banks $2

Religion does not teach hostility with each other
We are Indians, India is our homeland

Greece, Egypt, Rome are all extinct from the world
But our renown and fame have continued so far

There is some secret that our existence is not effaced
For centuries time's vicissitudes have been our foe

Iqbal! In the world there is no confidante of ours
How would anyone know the hidden pathos of ours $3
*
1. Allusion to the Himalayan Range, for which see Poem 1 Himala (The Himalayas).

2. Allusion to the arrival of Muslims in India. Unlike the British the Muslims settled in the Indian sub‑continent and made it their homeland, which establishes their claim to settle the political problems of India with due regard to their interests.

3. Allusion to the callousness of the world community to the calamity of the people of the Indian sub‑continent resulting from their political subjugation by the British. This was due to the complete political and economic domination of European countries over Asian and African nations by the beginning of the twentieth century when this poem was written. Naturally, India could not expect any sympathy from European countries. Unfortunately, this state of affairs has not changed after one more century and no European country is sympathetic with any other country in distress, particularly Muslim countries. Among other things this is due to the lack of real independence in spite of apparent political freedom.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-39.MP3
*
Sare Jahan Se Acha Hindustan Humara
Hum Bulbulain Hain Iss Ki, Ye Gulistan Humara



Gharbat Mein Hon Agar Hum, Rehta Hai Dil Watan Mein
Samjho Waheen Humain Bhi, Dil Ho Jahan Humara



Parbat Woh Sub Se Uncha, Humsaya Asman Ka
Woh Santri Humara, Woh Pasban Humara



Godi Mein Khailti Hain Iss Ki Hazaron Nadiyan
Gulshan Hai Jin Ke Dam Se Rashak-e-Jinaan Humara





Ae Aab-e-Rood-e-Ganga! Woh Din Hain Yaad Tujh Ko?
Utra Tere Kinare Jab Karwan Humara





Mazhab Nahin Sikhata Apas Mein Bair Rakhna
Hindi Hain Hum, Watan Hai Hindustan Humara



Yunan-o-Misar-o-Roma Sab Mit Gye Jahan Se
Ab Tak Magar Hai Baqi Naam-o-Nishan Humara



Kuch Baat Hai Ke Hasti Mitti Nahin Humari
Sadiyon Raha Hai Dushman Dour-e-Zaman Humara



Iqbal! Koi Mehram Apna Nahin Jahan Mein
Maloom Kya Kisi Ko Dard-e-Nihan Humara
*
