داغ
*
عظمت غالب ہے اک مدت سے پيوند زميں
مہدي مجروح ہے شہر خموشاں کا مکيں
توڑ ڈالي موت نے غربت ميں مينائے امير
چشم محفل ميں ہے اب تک کيف صہبائے امير
آج ليکن ہمنوا! سارا چمن ماتم ميں ہے
شمع روشن بجھ گئي، بزم سخن ماتم ميں ہے
بلبل دلي نے باندھا اس چمن ميں آشياں
ہم نوا ہيں سب عنادل باغ ہستي کے جہاں
چل بسا داغ آہ! ميت اس کي زيب دوش ہے
آخري شاعر جہان آباد کا خاموش ہے
اب کہاں وہ بانکپن، وہ شوخي طرز بياں
آگ تھي کافور پيري ميں جواني کي نہاں
تھي زبان داغ پر جو آرزو ہر دل ميں ہے
ليلي معني وہاں بے پردہ، ياں محمل ميں ہے
اب صبا سے کون پوچھے گا سکوت گل کا راز
کون سمجھے گا چمن ميں نالہ بلبل کا راز
تھي حقيقت سے نہ غفلت فکر کي پرواز ميں
آنکھ طائر کي نشيمن پر رہي پرواز ميں
اور دکھلائيں گے مضموں کي ہميں باريکياں
اپنے فکر نکتہ آرا کي فلک پيمائياں
تلخي دوراں کے نقشے کھينچ کر رلوائيں گے
يا تخيل کي نئي دنيا ہميں دکھلائيں گے
اس چمن ميں ہوں گے پيدا بلبل شيراز بھي
سينکڑوں ساحر بھي ہوں گے، صاحب اعجاز بھي
اٹھيں گے آزر ہزاروں شعر کے بت خانے سے
مے پلائيں گے نئے ساقي نئے پيمانے سے
لکھي جائيں گي کتاب دل کي تفسيريں بہت
ہوں گي اے خواب جواني! تيري تعبيريں بہت
ہوبہو کھينچے گا ليکن عشق کي تصوير کون ؟
اٹھ گيا ناوک فگن، مارے گا دل پر تير کون ؟
اشک کے دانے زمين شعر ميں بوتا ہوں ميں
تو بھي رو اے خاک دلي! داغ کو روتا ہوں ميں
اے جہان آباد، اے سرمايہ بزم سخن
ہوگيا پھر آج پامال خزاں تيرا چمن
وہ گل رنگيں ترا رخصت مثال بو ہوا
آہ! خالي داغ سے کاشانہ و اردو ہوا
تھي نہ شايد کچھ کشش ايسي وطن کي خاک ميں
وہ مہ کامل ہوا پنہاں دکن کي خاک ميں
اٹھ گئے ساقي جو تھے، ميخانہ خالي رہ گيا
يادگار بزم دہلي ايک حالي رہ گيا
آرزو کو خون رلواتي ہے بيداد اجل
مارتا ہے تير تاريکي ميں صياد اجل
کھل نہيں سکتي شکايت کے ليے ليکن زباں
ہے خزاں کا رنگ بھي وجہ قيام گلستاں
ايک ہي قانون عالم گير کے ہيں سب اثر
بوے گل کا باغ سے، گلچيں کا دنيا سے سفر
*
NAWAB MIRZA KHAN DAGH
*
This poem is an elegy for Nawab Mirza Khan Dagh written at the time of his death. It pays tribute to the literary genius of Dagh and shows the reverence and love of ‘Allamah Iqbal for him.
*
The grandeur of Ghalib1 has remained buried since long
Mahdi Majruh1 is the cemetery's resident since long

Death broke the decanter of Amir $1 in a strange country
The assembly's eye still has the ecstasy of the wine of Amir

However, today O Companion! The whole garden is mourning!
Lighted candle is extinguished, literary assembly is mourning!

The Delhi's nightingale made its nest in such a garden
Where all the world's nightingales are singing in a chorus

Ah Dagh has gone! His bier is on our shoulders
The last poet of Jahanabad $2 is finally silent

Gone is that smartness! Gone is that humor of style!
The fire of youth was veiled in the old age's camphor $3

Every heart has the longing which the language of Dagh had
This Lailah was unveiled there, she is behind the veil here

Who will ask zephyr now the secret of silence of the rose?
Who in the garden will understand the secret of nightingale's wailing?

In his elegant imagination he was not unaware of reality
The bird's eye remained focused on the nest even in flight

Others will show us the subtleties of linguistic thought
The elevated elegance of the sagacity of their thought

They will make us cry painting the picture of time's vicissitudes
Or will show us the new world of their imagination

Nightingales of Shiraz $4 also will be born in this garden
There will be hundreds of magicians and masters of miracles

Thousands of Azars $5 will rise from the temple of poetry
The new cup-bearers will serve wine from the new goblets

Many commentaries of the book of Love will be written
There will be many interpretations of the youths' dreams

However, who will draw the exact picture of Love?
The master having departed who will enchant the heart

I am sowing the seeds of tears in the soil of verse
You also cry, O Delhi's soil! I am crying for Dagh!

Ah! O The Ka'bah of the literateur's $6 religion
Your garden has been ruined by autumn today

That colorful rose of yours has departed like fragrance
That is, the abode of Urdu has become deprived of Dagh

Perhaps not much attraction was in the homeland's soil
That full moon has set in the soil of the Dakkan $7

The cup-bearers have left, the tavern has become deserted,
Only Hala $8 the memorable personality of Delhi's assembly has been left

The tyranny of death makes longing shed tears of blood
The archer of death shoots out arrows in the dark

However, the tongue cannot open in complaint
Autumn's style is also a prelude to garden's existence $9

The one universal law creates all such results
Exit of fragrance from the garden, that of the gardener from the world
*
1. Ghalib, Mahda Majruh and Amar- These are three very eminent poets of India who practiced their art in Delhi. Amar Khusroe lived during a period when Urdu was being created but was not known by that name. At that time it was called Raikhtah and was a mixture of Persian and Hindi, which was one of the dialects of Sanskrit. Raikhtah in Persian means "mixed", to indicate that the language was a mixture of Persian and Hindi in which the two languages were distinctly separate from each other. Amar Khusroe was one of the architects of such a language and his genius lies in doing that more successfully than others. He is also famous for devotional poetry in which the Love of God is described in beautiful style. It refers to the famous poet of Delhi, Amar Mana’a. If so the mention of Amar's "mana" with reference to his poetic name is very artistic.

2. Jahanabad- It is an abbreviation of Shahjahanabad, which was the original name of Delhi, given to it when it was reorganized and rebuilt during the reign of the Mughal emperor Shahjahan.

3. Camphor is characterized with coolness. This verse is a very artistic expression of the fact that Dagh's thinking was a judicious mixture of the fervor of youth tempered with the coolness of mature age.

4. Nightingale of Sharaz- This is the honorific title of the famous Persian poet "Hafiz Sharaza" and “Sada Shiraza” on account of their excellence in Persian poetry.

5. Azar- He was the father of S. Ibraham A.S. He was a famous sculptor of his age and is famous for making stone idols.

6. This refers to Delhi which was the rendezvous of geniuses in all fields of learning throughout the period of Muslim rule in the Indian sub‑continent.

7. Dakkan‑ This refers to Haiderabad, Dakkan.

8. Hala

9. This and the next verse are very artistic expression of logic and coherence in the working of the universe. Life without death is tasteless as the spring without autumn is tasteless.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-44.MP3
*
Azmat-e-Ghalib Hai Ek Muddat Se Pewand-e-Zameen
Mehdi-e-Majrooh Hai Sheher-e-Khamoshan Ka Makeen



Tor Dali Mout Ne Ghurbat Mein Meenaye Ameer
Chashme-e-Mehfil Mein Hai Ab Tak Kaif-e-Sehbaye Ameer



Aaj Lekin Hum-Nawa! Sara Chaman Matam Mein Hai
Shama-e-Roshan Bujh Gyi, Bazm-e-Sukhan Matam Mein Hai



Bulbul-e-Dilli Ne Bandha Iss Chaman Mein Ashiyan
Hum Nawa Hain Sub Anadil Bagh-e-Hasti Ke Jahan



Chal Basa Dagh! Aah! Mayyat Iss Ki Zaib-e-Dosh Hai
Akhri Shayar Jahan Abad Ka Khamosh Hai



Ab Kahan Woh Bankpan, Woh Soukhi-e-Tarz-e-Byaban
Aag Thi Kafoor-e-Peeri Mein Jawani Ki Nihan



Thi Zuban-e-Dagh Par Jo Aarzu Har Dil Mein Hai
Laila-e-Maani Wahan Be Parda, Yaan Mehmil Mein Hai



Ab Saba Se Kon Puche Ga Sukoot-e-Gul Ka Raaz
Kon Samjhe Ga Chaman Mein Nala-e-Bulbul Ka Raaz



Thi Haqiqat Se Na Ghaflat Fikar Ki Parwaz Mein
Aankh Taeer Ki Nasheman Par Rahi Parwaz Mein



Aur Dikhlayen Ge Mazmoon Ki Humain Bareekian
Apne Fikr-e-Nukta Aara Ki Falak Pemaeeyan



Talakhi-e-Doran Ke Naqhe Khainch Kar Rulwayen Ge
Ya Takhiyul Ki Nayi Dunya Humain Dikhlayen Ge



Iss Chaman Mein Hon Ge Paida Bulbul-e-Sheeraz Bhi
Saikron Sahir Bhi Hon Ge, Sahib-e-Ijaz Bhi



Uthain Ge Azar Hazaron Shair Ke Butkhane Se
Mai Pilayen Gen Aye Saqi Naye Pemane Se



Likhi Jaen Gi Kitab-e-Dil Ki Tafseerain Bohat
Hon Gi Ae Khawab-e-Jawani! Teri Taabeerain Bohat



Hu Bahu Khainche Ga Lekin Ishq Ki Tasveer Kon?
Uth Gya Nawak Fagan, Mare Ga Dil Par Teer Kon?



Ashak Ke Dane Zameen-e-Shair Mein Bota Hun Main
Tu Bhi Ro Ae Khak-e-Dilli! Dagh Ko Rota Hun Main



Ae Jahan Abad, Ae Sarmaya-e-Bazm-e-Sukhan!
Ho Gya Phir Aaj Pamal-e-Khazan Tera Chaman



Woh Gul-e-Rangeen Tera Rukhsat Misal-e-Bu Huwa
Ah! Khali Dagh Se Kashana-e-Urdu Huwa



Thi Na Shaid Kuch Kashish Aesi Watan Ki Khak Mein
Woh Mah-e-Kamil Huwa Pinhan Dakkan Ki Khak Mein



Uth Gye Saqi Jo The, Mai-Khana Khali Reh Gya
Yadgar-e-Bazm-e-Dehli Aik Hali Reh Gya



Arzoo Ko Khoon Rulati Hai Baidad-e-Ajal
Maarta Hai Teer Tareeki Mein Sayyad-e-Ajal



Khul Nahin Sakti Shakayat Ke Liye Lekin Zuban
Hai Khazan Ka Rang Bhi Wajah-e-Qayam-e-Gulistan



Aik Hi Qanoon-e-Alamgeer Ke Hain Sub Asar
Bu-e-Gul Ka Bagh Se, Gulcheen Ka Dunya Se Safar
*
