لائوں وہ تنکے کہيں سے آشيانے کے ليے
*
لائوں وہ تنکے کہيں سے آشيانے کے ليے
بجلياں بے تاب ہوں جن کو جلانے کے ليے
وائے ناکامي ، فلک نے تاک کر توڑا اسے
ميں نے جس ڈالي کو تاڑا آشيانے کے ليے
آنکھ مل جاتي ہے ہفتاد و دو ملت سے تري
ايک پيمانہ ترا سارے زمانے کے ليے
دل ميں کوئي اس طرح کي آرزو پيدا کروں
لوٹ جائے آسماں ميرے مٹانے کے ليے
جمع کر خرمن تو پہلے دانہ دانہ چن کے تو
آ ہي نکلے گي کوئي بجلي جلانے کے ليے
پاس تھا ناکامي صياد کا اے ہم صفير
!ورنہ ميں ، اور اڑ کے آتا ايک دانے کے ليے
اس چمن ميں مرغ دل گائے نہ آزادي کا گيت
آہ يہ گلشن نہيں ايسے ترانے کے ليے
*
I SHOULD PROCURE SUCH STRAWS FOR MY NEST FROM SOMEWHERE
*

*
I should procure such straws for my nest from somewhere
For burning which the lightning may be restless $1

Alas! O despair! The sky broke it down intently
Whichever branch I selected for my nest $2

You are contending with the seventy two nations
One goblet of yours suits the whole world best $3

I should create some such longing in my heart
So the sky may turn around to annihilate me best

Collect your harvest first by picking it grain by grain
Some thunderbolt will surely come out to annihilate it $4

I had regard for the failure of the hunter, O friend
Otherwise, why could I come over flying for one grain ?

The heart should not sing freedom's song in this garden
Ah! This garden is not suitable for such odes $5 !
*
1. One should be prepared to sacrifice everything in the Love of God.

2. Under the influence of Greek cosmology the sky was considered to control human destiny throughout the ancient world. In particular it was believed to bring ill luck. Though this belief no longer exists the expression still continues in Urdu and Persian literature.

3. Allusion to the Hadath of the Holy Prophet S.A.W. that the Muslim Ummah would be divided into seventy two sects. However, this verse reminds Muslims that the Holy Qur’an has been sent down to guide the entire world and unite the whole mankind into a super national society and State. So the Muslims, who are its first recipients and custodians, should keep their own brotherhood intact instead of being divided into seventy-two mutually contending sects. See the Holy Qur'an, especially 39:41; 80:11-16; 81:26-29.

4. Verses 4 and 5 mean that the highest felicity for a Lover of God is to sacrifice all his hard-earned worldly possessions in His cause.

5. This refers to the condition of the Indian sub-continent at the beginning of the twentieth century, when nobody could sing patriotic songs.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-50-04.MP3
*
Laon Woh Tinke Kahin Se Ashiyane Ke Liye
Bijlian Betaab Hun Jin Ko Jalane Ke Liye

Waye Nakami, Falak Ne Taak Kar Tora Usse
Mein Ne Jis Dali Ko Tara Ashiyane Ke Liye


Ankh Mil Jati Hai Haftad Wa Do Millat Se Teri
Aik Permana Tera Sare Zamane Ke Liye



Dil Mein Koi Iss Tarah Ki Arzu Paida Karun
Lot Jaye Asman Mere Mitane Ke Liye


Jama Kar Kharman Tu Pehle Dana Dana Chun Ke Tu
Aa Hi Nikle Gi Koi Bijle Jalane Ke Liye


Pas Tha Nakami-e-Sayyad Ka Ae Hum-Safeer
Warna Main Aur Urh Ke Ata Aik Dane Ke Liye!

Iss Chaman Mein Murgh-e-Dil Gaye Na Azadi Ka Geet
Aah! Ye Gulshan Nahin Aese Tarane Ke Liye
*
