جنھيں ميں ڈھونڈتا تھا آسمانوں ميں زمينوں ميں
*
جنھيں ميں ڈھونڈتا تھا آسمانوں ميں زمينوں ميں
وہ نکلے ميرے ظلمت خانہ دل کے مکينوں ميں
حقيقت اپني آنکھوں پر نماياں جب ہوئي اپني
مکاں نکلا ہمارے خانہ دل کے مکينوں ميں
اگر کچھ آشنا ہوتا مذاق جبہہ سائي سے
تو سنگ آستاں کعبہ جا ملتا جبينوں ميں
کبھي اپنا بھي نظارہ کيا ہے تو نے اے مجنوں
کہ ليلي کي طرح تو خود بھي ہے محمل نشينوں ميں
مہينے وصل کے گھڑيوں کي صورت اڑتے جاتے ہيں
مگر گھڑياں جدائي کي گزرتي ہيں مہينوں ميں
مجھے روکے گا تو اے ناخدا کيا غرق ہونے سے
کہ جن کو ڈوبنا ہو ، ڈوب جاتے ہيں سفينوں ميں
چھپايا حسن کو اپنے کليم اللہ سے جس نے
وہي ناز آفريں ہے جلوہ پيرا نازنينوں ميں
جلا سکتي ہے شمع کشتہ کو موج نفس ان کي
الہي! کيا چھپا ہوتا ہے اہل دل کے سينوں ميں
تمنا درد دل کي ہو تو کر خدمت فقيروں کي
نہيں ملتا يہ گوہر بادشاہوں کے خزينوں ميں
نہ پوچھ ان خرقہ پوشوں کي ، ارادت ہو تو ديکھ ان کو
يد بيضا ليے بيٹھے ہيں اپني آستينوں ميں
ترستي ہے نگاہ نا رسا جس کے نظارے کو
وہ رونق انجمن کي ہے انھي خلوت گزينوں ميں
کسي ايسے شرر سے پھونک اپنے خرمن دل کو
کہ خورشيد قيامت بھي ہو تيرے خوشہ چينوں ميں
محبت کے ليے دل ڈھونڈ کوئي ٹوٹنے والا
يہ وہ مے ہے جسے رکھتے ہيں نازک آبگينوں ميں
سراپا حسن بن جاتا ہے جس کے حسن کا عاشق
بھلا اے دل حسيں ايسا بھي ہے کوئي حسينوں ميں
پھڑک اٹھا کوئي تيري ادائے 'ما عرفنا' پر
ترا رتبہ رہا بڑھ چڑھ کے سب ناز آفرينوں ميں
نماياں ہو کے دکھلا دے کبھي ان کو جمال اپنا
بہت مدت سے چرچے ہيں ترے باريک بينوں ميں
خموش اے دل! ، بھري محفل ميں چلانا نہيں اچھا
ادب پہلا قرينہ ہے محبت کے قرينوں ميں
برا سمجھوں انھيں مجھ سے تو ايسا ہو نہيں سکتا
کہ ميں خود بھي تو ہوں اقبال اپنے نکتہ چينوں ميں
*
THE ONE I WAS SEARCHING FOR ON THE EARTH AND IN HEAVEN
*
This ghazal is very highly mystical and difficult to understand . However , the explanatory notes will , hopefully , help in understanding it.
*
The one I was searching for on the earth and in heaven
Appeared residing in the recesses of my own heart

When the reality of the self became evident to my eyes
The house appeared among residents of my own heart $1

If it were somewhat familiar with taste of rubbing foreheads
The stone of Ka‘bah’s threshold would have joined the foreheads $2

O Majnun! Have you ever glanced at yourself
That like Lailah $3 you are also sitting in the litter

The months of the union continue flying like moments
But the moments of separation linger for months!

O seaman, how will you protect me from being drowned
As those destined to drowning get drowned in the boats also

The one who concealed His Beauty from Kalam Allah
The same Beloved is manifest among beloveds $4

The breath of Lovers can light up the extinguished candle
O God! What is kept concealed in the breast of the Lovers? $5

Serve the faqars if you have the longing for Love
This pearl is not available in the treasures of kings

Do not ask of these Devotees, if you have faith, you should look at them
They have the illuminated palm up their sleeves $6

The unsightful eye for whose spectacle is tantalized
That elegance of congregation is in these very recluses

Burn the produce of your heart with some such spark
That the Last Day’s sun may also be among your gleaners $7

For Love search for some heart which would become mortified
This is the wine which is not kept in delicate wine glasses

The Beauty itself becomes the Lover of whose Beauty
O Heart! Does someone among the beautiful has that beauty? $8

Someone became highly excited at your grace of Ma‘arafna
Your rank remained among the most elegant of all the Lovers $9

Manifest Thyself and show them Thy Beauty some time
Talks have continued among the sagacious since long time

Silent, O Heart! Crying in the full assembly is not good
Decorum is the most important etiquette among the ways of Love

It is not possible for me to deem my critics bad
Because Iqbal, I am myself among my critics
*
1. The word "house" represents the abode of God and it really exists in the human heart of His true Lover. The human heart is so represented in tasawwuf literature.

2. The pleasure of earnest beseeching before God in prostration is so great that if the stone of the threshold of the Ka’bah was aware of that pleasure it would have preferred to be the forehead itself, and participate in such a prostration than be merely the stone towards which such prostrations are performed.

3. If the Lover realizes his own self, i.e. develops his own Khuda or self, the difference between the Lover and the Beloved would disappear. This amounts to the concept of Fana Fi Allah of Wahdat al-Wujud. This verse is one of the verses which indicate ‘Allamah Iqbal’s inclination towards Wahdat al-Wujud in early life.

4. God exists everywhere if His Lover has developed his insight enough to see Him.

5. The power of God is Supreme.

6. This and the following verse describe the unlimited power of the Lover of God.

7. The sun of the Last Day is proverbial for its torturing heat. However, the power of the true Love of God is such that even that sun will come down to collect flowers from the Lover’s heap.

8. The universal Beauty of God itself becomes the Lover of a true Lover of God.

9. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 5:83 (with slight change), the perusal of which will clarify the meaning of this verse.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-50-9.mp3
*
inhain Mein Dhondta Tha Asmanon Mein Zameenon Mein
Woh Nikle Mere Zulmat Khana-e-Dil Ke Makeenon Mein
Haqiqat Apni Ankhon Par Namayan Jab Huwi Apni
Makan Nikla Humare Khana-e-Dil Ke Makeenon Mein


Agar Kuch Ashana Hota Mazaq-e-Jaba-Sayi Se
To Sang-e-Astan-e-Kaaba Ja Milta Jabeenon Mein


Kabhi Apna Bhi Nazara Kiya Hai Tu Ne Ae Majnoon
Ke Laila Ki Tarah Tu Bhi Hai Mehmil Nasheenon Mein


Mahine Wasl Ke Ghariyon Ki Soorat Urte Jate Hain
Magar Ghariyan Judai Ki Guzerti Hain Mahinon Mein


Mujhe Roke Ga Tu Ae Na-Khuda Kya Gharaq Hone Se
Ke Jin Ko Doobna Ho, Doob Jate Hain Safeenon Mein


Chupaya Husn Ko Apne Kaleem-Ullah Se Jis Ne
Wohi Naz Afreen Hai Jalwa Pera Naaz Neenon Mein



Jala Sakti Hai Shama-e-Kushta Ko Mouj-e-Nafas In Ki
Elahi! Kya Chupa Hota Hai Ahl-e-Dil Ke Seenon Mein


Tamanna Dard-e-Dil Ki Ho To Kar Khidmat Faqeeron Ki
Nahin Milta Ye Gohar Badshahon Ke Khazeenon Mein


Na Puch In Kharqa Poshon Ki, Iradat Ho To Dekh In Ko
Yad-e-Baiza Liye Baithe Hain Apni Asteenon Mein


Tarasti Hai Nigah-e-Narsa Jis Ke Nazare Ko
Woh Ronaq Anjuman Ki Hai Inhi Khalwat Guzinon Mein


Kisi Aese Sharar Se Phoonk Apne Kharman-e-Dil Ko
Ke Khursheed-e-Qayamat Bhi Ho Tere Khosha Cheenon Mein
Mohabbat Ke Liye Dil Dhoond Koi Tootne Wala
Ye Woh Mai Hai Jise Rakhte Hain Nazuk Abgeenon Mein


Sarapa Husn Ban Jata Hai Jis Ke Husn Ka Ashiq
Bhala Ae Dil Haseen Aesa Bhi Hai Koi Haseenon Mein


Pharak Utha Koi Teri Adaye ‘MA ARAFNA’ Par
Tera Rutba Raha Barh Charh Ke Sub Naaz Afreenon Mein


Namayan Ho Ke Dikhla De Kabhi In Ko Jamal Apna
Bohat Muddat Se Cherche Hain Tere Bareek Beenon Mein


Khamosh Ae Dil! Bhari Mehfil Mein Chillana Nahin Acha
Adab Pehla Qareena Hai Mohabbat Ke Qareenon Mein


Bura Samajhun Inhain, Mujh Se To Aesa Ho Nahin Sakta
Ke Main Khud Bhi To Hun Iqbal Apne Nukta Cheenon Mein
*
