سختياں کرتا ہوں دل پر ، غير سے غافل ہوں ميں
*
سختياں کرتا ہوں دل پر ، غير سے غافل ہوں ميں
ہائے کيا اچھي کہي ظالم ہوں ميں ، جاہل ہوں ميں
ميں جبھي تک تھا کہ تيري جلوہ پيرائي نہ تھي
جو نمود حق سے مٹ جاتا ہے وہ باطل ہوں ميں
علم کے دريا سے نکلے غوطہ زن گوہر بدست
وائے محرومي! خزف چين لب ساحل ہوں ميں
ہے مري ذلت ہي کچھ ميري شرافت کي دليل
جس کي غفلت کو ملک روتے ہيں وہ غافل ہوں ميں
بزم ہستي! اپني آرائش پہ تو نازاں نہ ہو
تو تو اک تصوير ہے محفل کي اور محفل ہوں ميں
ڈھونڈتا پھرتا ہوں اے اقبال اپنے آپ کو
آپ ہي گويا مسافر ، آپ ہي منزل ہوں ميں
*
I BEAR HARDSHIPS ON MYSELF, I AM UNCONCERNED WITH OTHERS
*

*
I bear hardships on myself, I am unconcerned with others
Alas! How strange, I am the oppressor, I am the ignorant $1

I existed only till the time Thy Splendor appeared $2
I am the falsehood which is annihilated by the Truth

From the knowledge’s sea divers came out with pearls in hand
Alas, O deprivation! A mere pebble collector on the sea shore I am $3

My disgrace itself is the demonstration of my nobility
I am the negligence which the angels ardently desire $4

O the existence’ assemblage! Be not proud of your beauty
You are a mere picture of the assemblage, I am the assemblage $5

O Iqbal! I am in constant search for myself
I am the traveler as well as the destination
*
1. This is the kind of sarcastic remark people make on the material losses and sufferings of the true Lovers of God.

2. This is an expression of the modesty of ‘Allamah Iqbal about himself, similar to that of Sir Isaac Newton.

3. Allusion to the transfer of S. Adam A.S. from Paradise to the earth on account of his negligence in obeying the Command of God.

4. The whole purpose of the Creation of the universe was to create Man, who is the master-piece of the creation , and the master-piece of the human elegance is the person of the Holy Prophet S.A.W . There is a Hadath to the effect that God would not have created the universe if He had not intended to create the Holy Prophet S.A.W.

5. Allusion to the constant search of Man to know himself.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-50-12.mp3
*
Sakhtiyan Karta Hun Dil Par, Ghair Se Ghafil Hun Main
Haye Kya Achi Kehi Zalim Hun Main, Jahil Hun Main


Main Jabhi Tak Tha Ke Teri Jalwa Pairayi Na Thi
Jo Namood-e-Haq Se Mit Jata Hai Woh Batil Hun Main


Ilm Ke Darya Se Nikle Ghota Zan Gohar Badast
Waye Mehroomi! Khazaf Chain-e-Lab Sahil Hun Main


Hai Meri Dillat Hi Kuch Meri Sharafat Ki Daleel
Jis Ki Ghaflat Ko Malak Rote Hain Woh Ghafil Hun Mein


Bazm-e-Hasti ! Apni Araaish Pe Tu Nazaan Na Ho
Tu To Ek Tasveer Hai Mehfil Ki Aur Mehfil Hun Main


Dhoonta Phirta Hun Ae Iqbal Apne App Ko
App Hi Goya Musafir, App Hi Manzil Hun Mein
*
