محبت
*
عروس شب کي زلفيں تھيں ابھي نا آشنا خم سے
ستارے آسماں کے بے خبر تھے لذت رم سے
قمر اپنے لباس نو ميں بيگانہ سا لگتا تھا
نہ تھا واقف ابھي گردش کے آئين مسلم سے
ابھي امکاں کے ظلمت خانے سے ابھري ہي تھي دنيا
مذاق زندگي پوشيدہ تھا پہنائے عالم سے
کمال نظم ہستي کي ابھي تھي ابتدا گويا
ہويدا تھي نگينے کي تمنا چشم خاتم سے
سنا ہے عالم بالا ميں کوئي کيمياگر تھا
صفا تھي جس کي خاک پا ميں بڑھ کر ساغر جم سے
لکھا تھا عرش کے پائے پہ اک اکسير کا نسخہ
چھپاتے تھے فرشتے جس کو چشم روح آدم سے
نگاہيں تاک ميں رہتي تھيں ليکن کيمياگر کي
وہ اس نسخے کو بڑھ کر جانتا تھا اسم اعظم سے
بڑھا تسبيح خواني کے بہانے عرش کي جانب
تمنائے دلي آخر بر آئي سعي پيہم سے
پھرايا فکر اجزا نے اسے ميدان امکاں ميں
چھپے گي کيا کوئي شے بارگاہ حق کے محرم سے
چمک تارے سے مانگي ، چاند سے داغ جگر مانگا
اڑائي تيرگي تھوڑي سي شب کي زلف برہم سے
تڑپ بجلي سے پائي ، حور سے پاکيزگي پائي
حرارت لي نفسہائے مسيح ابن مريم سے
ذرا سي پھر ربوبيت سے شان بے نيازي لي
ملک سے عاجزي ، افتادگي تقدير شبنم سے
پھر ان اجزا کو گھولا چشمہء حيواں کے پاني ميں
مرکب نے محبت نام پايا عرش اعظم سے
مہوس نے يہ پاني ہستي نوخيز پر چھڑکا
گرہ کھولي ہنر نے اس کے گويا کار عالم سے
ہوئي جنبش عياں ، ذروں نے لطف خواب کو چھوڑا
گلے ملنے لگے اٹھ اٹھ کے اپنے اپنے ہمدم سے
خرام ناز پايا آفتابوں نے ، ستاروں نے
چٹک غنچوں نے پائي ، داغ پائے لالہ زاروں نے
*
LOVE
*
This poem deals with the Love of God, which is a very favorite topic of ‘Allamah Iqbal. The poem deals with the creation, composition and evolution of Love as well as its invigorating effects on the universe and ultimately on Man. However, the style is mystic and very metaphorical, exhibiting flights of poetic imagination. Some words and phrases cannot be translated into correct and succinct English and have been mentioned in original in the text and explained in the explanatory notes.
*
The locks of the bride of night’s hair were still unbent
The sky’s stars were unacquainted with the taste of running $1

The moon in its new attire was looking a little strange
Was not familiar with the established laws of revolution

The earth had just emanated from possibility’s dark recesses
Life’s taste was still concealed from the expanse of space

Perfection of the order of existence was just starting
The gem’s longing was apparent from the ring’s eye

It is said that there was an alchemist in the spiritual world
The dust of whose feet was clearer than the Jam’s wine cup $2

A recipe for an Iksar $3 was written on the leg of ‘Arsh
Which was hidden jealously by angels from Adam’s eye

But the alchemist’s attention was ever concentrated on it
He considered that recipe greater than Ism-i-A‘ïam $4

He advanced to the ‘Arsh under pretense of doxology
Inner longing was at last achieved by constant effort

He was roaming in the world in search of components
Nothing could be concealed from the knower of God’s Audience $5

He procured brightness from the star, spot from the moon $6
He stole a little darkness from the night’s uncombed hair

He obtained restlessness from thunder, chastity from Hur $7
He took warmth from the breath of Masah son of Maryam $8

Then he took a little grandeur of Beniyazi $9 from the Divinity
He took humility from the angel, humbleness from dew’s destiny

Then dissolved these components in Chashmah-i-Haivan’s water $10
The compound was given the name of "Love" by the Grand ‘Arsh

The alchemist sprinkled this water at the newly created existence
With skill’s help he opened the knot of the world’s secrets

Movement appeared, the elements gave up sleep
Getting up each started embracing its companion

The suns and the stars learnt elegant movements
Flower buds learnt blooming poppies got their spots $11
*
1. This verse refers to the period when the universe was in its early stages and had not started functioning. The first two verses concern the stage when the universe was stationary and had not acquired movement. The next two verses talk about the stage when there was no light.

2. As has been explained earlier a famous Persian king, called Jamshad had a wine cup in which he could see the whole world (something analogous to the satellites of the present age). This property of the wine cup was attributed to its clarity. However, here the alchemist’s feet are described as cleaner that Jamshad’s wine cup. The alchemist represents a Mu’min and this verse pays high tribute to Man’s potential, which develops fully on a person’s becoming a M%u’min.

3. Iksar. It is an Arabic work and is a legendary substance which would transform any object into gold. Similarly, there was a legendary spring called Chashmah-i-Haivan, or "the spring of life", whose water would confer immortality on any living thing which drank it, including Man. These two things were the objects of the quest of Man in the ancient world. This quest was the purpose and the originator of all research. All knowledge emanated from the pursuit of these two goals. Both of them have been referred to in this poem.

4. Ism-i-A‘ïam or "The Great Name". This is one of the ninety nine names or attributes of God, the reciting of which casts an irresistible destructive influence over evil spirits, evil persons and other enemies. This name is not known to any one and is the object of the quest of the people searching for the supernatural. According to this poem the secret of the Ism-i-A‘ïam is concealed in the Love of God. In other words His Lover has the power of facing any enemy successfully.

5. Allusion to the Man’s potential for knowing all secrets in the universe, if he tries ardently and in the right way, which includes the Love of God and constant sincere struggle in His cause.

6. The moon’s spots are poetically considered to be created by the Moon’s Love for God, as a lover’s heart develops scars from the anguish of his love for his beloved.

7. Hurs. Young virgin female beauties of Paradise.

8. Masah Ibn Maryam - ‘Isa A.S., son of S. Maryam A.S.

9. Beniyaza - It means freedom from all needs and is one of the attributes of God. This verse means that the main motive force in the functioning of the universe is gravity or Love, which is only a small part of the Power and Will of God.

10. Chashmah-i-Haivan This is the spring of immortality referred to in Note 3.

11. The Lalah. This is the Persian word for tulip as well as the poppy flower. Here it refers to the latter. The poppy flower has a dark spot at the bottom of the corolla on the inside, which is variously referred to in Persian and Urdu poetry and is taken as a mark of perfection of this flower’s beauty. Other attributes of the different objects mentioned in this verse are signs of their perfection in the same way. The rotatory and revolutionary movements of all bodies in the universe in their fixed orbits is described metaphorically as their search for the Truth of the Beloved, i.e. God. This Love has made the universe operate the way it does. It is a fact that the force of mutual attraction of all these bodies, i.e. gravity keeps the balance between them. This is also referred to by ‘Allamah Iqbal in many places for emphasizing unity in the Muslim Ummah for their proper functioning and prosperity.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-01.mp3
*
Uroos-e-Shab Ki Zulfain Theen Abhi Na-Ashna Kham Se
Sitare Asaman Ke Be-Khabar The Lazzat-e-Ram Se



Qamar Apne Libas-e-Nawa Mein Begana Sa Lagta Tha
Na Tha Waqif Abhi Gardish Ke Aaeen-e-Muslim Se



Abhi Imkan Ke Zulmat Khane Se Ubhri Hi Thi Dunya
Mazaq-e-Zindagi Poshida Tha Pehnaye Alam Se



Kamal-e-Nazam-e-Hasti Ki Abhi Thi Ibtada Goya
Haweda Thi Nagine Ki Tamanna Chashme-e-Khatam Se



Suna Hai Alam-e-Bala Mein Koi Keemiya-Gar Tha
Safa Thi Jis Ki Khak-e-Pa Mein Barh Kar Saghir-e-Jam Se



Likha Tha Arsh Ke Paye Pe Ek Ikseer Ka Nuskha
Chupate The Farishte Jis Ko Chashm-e-Rooh-e-Adam Se



Nigahain Taak Mein Rehti Then Lekin Keemiya-Gar Ki
Woh Iss Nuskhe Ko Barh Kar Janta Tha Ism-e-Azam Se



Barha Tasbeeh Khawani Ke Bahane Arsh Ki Janib
Tamanna-e-Dili Akhir Bar Ayi Saee-e-Peham Se



Phiraya Fikr-e-Ajza Ne Use Maidan-e-Imkan Mein
Chupe Gi Kya Koi Shay Bargah-e-Haq Ke Mehram Se



Chamak Tare Se Mangi, Chand Se Dagh-e-Jigar Manga
Urhayi Teergi Thori Si Shab Ki Zulf-e-Barham Se



Tarap Bijli Se Payi,Hoor Se Pakeezgi Payi
Hararat Li Nafashaye Maseeh-e-Ibn-e-Mariam (A.S.) Se



Zara Si Phir Rabubiat Se Shan-e-Be-Niazi Li
Malak Se Ajazi, Uftadgi Taqdeer-e-Shabnam Se



Phir In Ajza Ko Ghola Chasma-e-Hewan Ke Pani Men
Marakkab Nemohabbat Naam Paya Arsh-e-Azam Se



Muhwish Ne Ye Pani Hasti-e-Naukhaiz Par Chirka
Girah Kholi Hunar Ne Uss Ke Goya Kaar-e-Alam Se



Huwi Junbish Ayan, Zarron Ne Lutf-e-Khawab Ko Chora
Gile Milne Lage Uth Uth Ke Apne Apne Humdam Se


Kharaam-e-Naaz Paya Aftabon Ne, Sitaron Ne
Chatak Ghunchon Ne Payi, Dagh Paye Lala-Zaron Ne

*
