حسن و عشق
*
جس طرح ڈوبتي ہے کشتي سيمين قمر
نور خورشيد کے طوفان ميں ہنگام سحر
جسے ہو جاتا ہے گم نور کا لے کر آنچل
چاندني رات ميں مہتاب کا ہم رنگ کنول
جلوہ طور ميں جيسے يد بيضائے کليم
موجہ نکہت گلزار ميں غنچے کي شميم
ہے ترے سيل محبت ميں يونہي دل ميرا
تو جو محفل ہے تو ہنگامہء محفل ہوں ميں
حسن کي برق ہے تو ، عشق کا حاصل ہوں ميں
تو سحر ہے تو مرے اشک ہيں شبنم تيري
شام غربت ہوں اگر ميں تو شفق تو ميري
مرے دل ميں تري زلفوں کي پريشاني ہے
تري تصوير سے پيدا مري حيراني ہے
حسن کامل ہے ترا ، عشق ہے کامل ميرا
ہے مرے باغ سخن کے ليے تو باد بہار
ميرے بے تاب تخيل کو ديا تو نے قرار
جب سے آباد ترا عشق ہوا سينے ميں
نئے جوہر ہوئے پيدا مرے آئينے ميں
حسن سے عشق کي فطرت کو ہے تحريک کمال
تجھ سے سر سبز ہوئے ميري اميدوں کے نہال
قافلہ ہو گيا آسودہء منزل ميرا
*
THE BEAUTY AND THE LOVE
*
This poem is the spontaneous manifestation of Divine Love in the breast of ‘Allamah Iqbal. The language is very mystical and metaphorical. The poem contains all the attributes of ‘Ishq-i-Haqaqa ’ (Love of God) in the terminology of ‘Ishq-i-Majaza (Love of created beings used metaphorically) as is the practice in the Islamic mystic poetry.
*
Just as the moon’s silver boat is drowned
In the storm of sun’s light at the break of dawn

Just as the moon-like lotus disappears
Behind the veil of light in the moon-lit night

Just like the Kalam’s radiant palm in the tur’s effulgence $1
And the flower bud’s fragrance in the wave of garden’s breeze

Similar is my heart in the flood of Thy Love

If Thou art the assembly, I am the assembly’s splendor
If Thou art the Beauty’s thunder, I am the produce of Love $2

If Thou art the dawn, my tears are Thy dew
If I am traveler’s night, Thou art my twilight $3

My heart harbors Thy disheveled hair locks
My bewilderment is created by Thy picture

Thy Beauty is Perfect, my Love is perfect

Thou art the spring’s breeze $4 for my poetry’s garden
Thou gave tranquillity to my restless imagination

Since Thy Love took residence in my breast
New lights have been added to my mirror

Love’s nature gets stimulation for Perfection from Beauty
My hope’s trees flourished through Thy favor

My caravan has reached its destination
*
1. Allusion to the miracle by which the palm of S. Musa A.S. turned radiant on the Mount tur which was one of the signs of God as described in the Holy Qur‘an 27:12 and 28: 32.

2. This verse alludes to the high status of Man in the universe.

3. Just as the evening’s twilight constitutes its beauty, the Love of God creates and perfects the beauty of Man.

4. Just as the spring’s breeze confers and perfects the beauty of the garden the Love of God confers and perfects the beauty of the literary works of ‘Allamah Iqbal. These attributes of the Love of God can be extended to any other person who strives to create and nurture it in his breast. This thought is continued in the next two verses.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-07.mp3
*
Jis Tarah Doobti Hai Kishti-e-Simeen-e-Qamar
Noor-e-Khursheed Ke Toofan Mein Hangam-e-Sehar



Jaise Ho Jata Hai Gum Noor Ka Le Kar Anchal
Chandani Raat Mein Mehtab Ka Hum-Rang Kanwal



Jalwa-e-Toor Mein Jaise Yad-Baiza-e-Kaleem
Mouja-e-Nukhat-e-Gulzar Mein Ghunche Ki Shamim



Hai Tere Seel-e-Mohabbat Mein Tunhi Dil Mera

Tu Jo Mehfil Hai To Hangama-e-Mehfil Hun Mein
Husn Ki Barq Hai Tu, Ishq Ka Hasil Hun Mein

Tu Sehar Hai To Mere Ashk Hain Shabnam Teri
Sham-e-Ghurbat Hun Agar Main To Shafaq Tu Meri

Mere Dil Mein Teri Zulfon Ki Preshani Hai
Teri Tasveer Se Paida Meri Herani Hai

Husn Kamil Hai Tera, Ishq Hai Kamil Mera


Hai Mere Bagh-e-Sukhan Ke Liye Tu Baad-e-Bahar
Mere Betaab Takhiyyul Ko Diya Tu Ne Qarar


Jab Se Abad Tera Ishq Huwa Seene Mein
Naye Jouhar Huwe Paida Mere Aaeene Mein



Husn Se Ishq Ki Fitrat Ko Hai Tehreek-e-Kamal
Tujh Se Sar-Sabz Huwe Mer Umeedon Ke Nihal



Qafla Ho Gya Asuda-e-Manzil Mera
*
