چاند اور تارے
*
ڈرتے ڈرتے دم سحر سے
تارے کہنے لگے قمر سے
نظارے رہے وہي فلک پر
ہم تھک بھي گئے چمک چمک کر
کام اپنا ہے صبح و شام چلنا
چلنا چلنا ، مدام چلنا
بے تاب ہے اس جہاں کي ہر شے
کہتے ہيں جسے سکوں، نہيں ہے
رہتے ہيں ستم کش سفر سب
تارے، انساں، شجر، حجر سب
ہوگا کبھي ختم يہ سفر کيا
منزل کبھي آئے گي نظر کيا
کہنے لگا چاند ، ہم نشينو
!اے مزرع شب کے خوشہ چينو
جنبش سے ہے زندگي جہاں کي
يہ رسم قديم ہے يہاں کي
ہے دوڑتا اشہب زمانہ
کھا کھا کے طلب کا تازيانہ
اس رہ ميں مقام بے محل ہے
پوشيدہ قرار ميں اجل ہے
چلنے والے نکل گئے ہيں
جو ٹھہرے ذرا، کچل گئے ہيں
انجام ہے اس خرام کا حسن
آغاز ہے عشق، انتہا حسن
*
THE MOON AND STARS
*
This poem gives the message of “Longing and Constant Struggle” which is a very strong message in ‘Allamah Iqbal's works. The poem brings out the universal law that everything from the nuclear elementary particles to the stars and countless constellations is in constant motion. Stationary condition is an optical illusion as is partially stated in the theory of relativity. Following from this fact about the physical universe and the teachings of the Holy Qur’an is his message to Muslims that dynamism is the secret of success in this world as in the hereafter. His works are replete with these two concepts as is shown by the following two verses:

(181) Constantly flowing is the river of life
Everything creates the flow of life

(182) Dynamism produces life, paradise as well as hell
Man in his nature is made neither of light nor of fire
*
Being scared by the approaching dawn
Stars started saying to the moon

"The same scenes have continued in the sky
We became even tired of continuous shining

Our duty is moving morning till night
Moving, moving, continuously moving

Everything in this universe is restless
What is known as rest does not exist

Remain oppressed by the moving all
Stars, mankind, trees, rocks and all

Will this journey ever finish?
Will destination be ever visible?"

The moon started saying, "O Companions"!
"O gleaners of the field of night

In motion is the life of the universe
This is an age‑old custom of this place

The horse of time is ever running
Flogged by the desire for search

Resting on this path is inappropriate
Concealed in the rest's cloak is death

Those who were moving, have moved away!
Those halting a little, have been trampled!

The reward for this moving is Beauty
Love is the beginning, the end is Beauty
*

*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-10.mp3
*
Darte Darte Dam-e-Sehar Se
Tare Kehne Lage Qamar Se



Nazare Rahe Wohi Falak Par
Hum Thak Bhi Gaye Chamak Chamak Kar



Kaam Apna Hai Subah-o-Shaam Chalna
Chalna, Chalna, Madaam Chalna



Betaab Hai Iss Jahan Ki Har Shay
Kehte Hain Jise Sukoon, Nahin Hain



Rehte Hain Sitam Kash-e-Safar Sub
Tare, Insan, Shajar, Hajar Sub



Ho Ga Kabhi Khatam Ye Safar Kya
Manzil Kabhi Aye Gi Nazar Kya



Kehne Laga Chand, Hum Nasheeno
Ae Mazra-e-Shab Ke Khausha Cheeno!



Junbish Se Hai Zindagi Jahan Ki
Ye Rasm Qadeem Hai Yahan Ki



Hai Dorta Ashab-e-Zamana
Kha Kha Ke Talab Ka Taziyana



Iss Reh Mein Maqam Be-Mehel Hai
Poshida Qarar Mein Ajal Hai



Chalne Wale Nikl Gye Hain
Jo Thehre Zra, Kuchal Gye Hain



Anjaam Hai Iss Kharaam Ka Husn
Aghaz Hai Ishq, Intihaa Husn
*
