عا شق ہر جائي
*
@ (1)

ہے عجب مجموعہء اضداد اے اقبال تو
رونق ہنگامہء محفل بھي ہے، تنہا بھي ہے
!تيرے ہنگاموں سے اے ديوانہ رنگيں نوا
زينت گلشن بھي ہے ، آرائش صحرا بھي ہے
ہم نشيں تاروں کا ہے تو رفعت پرواز سے
اے زميں فرسا ، قدم تيرا فلک پيما بھي ہے
عين شغل ميں پيشاني ہے تيري سجدہ ريز
کچھ ترے مسلک ميں رنگ مشرب مينا بھي ہے
مثل بوئے گل لباس رنگ سے عرياں ہے تو
ہے تو حکمت آفريں ، ليکن تجھے سودا بھي ہے
جانب منزل رواں بے نقش پا مانند موج
اور پھر افتادہ مثل ساحل دريا بھي ہے
حسن نسواني ہے بجلي تيري فطرت کے ليے
پھر عجب يہ ہے کہ تيرا عشق بے پروا بھي ہے
تيري ہستي کا ہے آئين تفنن پر مدار
تو کبھي ايک آستانے پر جبيں فرسا بھي ہے ؟
ہے حسينوں ميں وفا نا آشنا تيرا خطاب
اے تلون کيش! تو مشہور بھي ، رسوا بھي ہے
لے کے آيا ہے جہاں ميں عادت سيماب تو
تيري بے تابي کے صدقے، ہے عجب بے تاب تو


@ (2)

عشق کي آشفتگي نے کر ديا صحرا جسے
مشت خاک ايسي نہاں زير قبا رکھتا ہوں ميں
ہيں ہزاروں اس کے پہلو ، رنگ ہر پہلو کا اور
سينے ميں ہيرا کوئي ترشا ہوا رکھتا ہوں ميں
دل نہيں شاعر کا ، ہے کيفيتوں کي رستخيز
کيا خبر تجھ کو درون سينہ کيا رکھتا ہوں ميں
آرزو ہر کيفيت ميں اک نئے جلوے کي ہے
مضطرب ہوں ، دل سکوں نا آشنا رکھتا ہوں ميں
گو حسين تازہ ہے ہر لحظہ مقصود نظر
حسن سے مضبوط پيمان وفا رکھتا ہوں ميں
بے نيازي سے ہے پيدا ميري فطرت کا نياز
سوز و ساز جستجو مثل صبا رکھتا ہوں ميں
موجب تسکيں تماشائے شرار جستہ اے
ہو نہيں سکتا کہ دل برق آشنا رکھتا ہوں ميں
ہر تقاضا عشق کي فطرت کا ہو جس سے خموش
آہ! وہ کامل تجلي مدعا رکھتا ہوں ميں
جستجو کل کي ليے پھرتي ہے اجزا ميں مجھے
حسن بے پاياں ہے ، درد لادوا رکھتا ہوں ميں
زندگي الفت کي درد انجاميوں سے ہے مري
عشق کو آزاد دستور وفا رکھتا ہوں ميں
سچ اگر پوچھے تو افلاس تخيل ہے وفا
دل ميں ہر دم اک نيا محشر بپا رکھتا ہوں ميں
فيض ساقي شبنم آسا ، ظرف دل دريا طلب
تشنہء دائم ہوں آتش زير پا رکھتا ہوں ميں
مجھ کو پيدا کر کے اپنا نکتہ چيں پيدا کيا
نقش ہوں ، اپنے مصور سے گلا رکھتا ہوں ميں
محفل ہستي ميں جب ايسا تنک جلوہ تھا حسن
پھر تخيل کس ليے لا انتہا رکھتا ہوں ميں
در بيابان طلب پيوستہ مي کوشيم ما
موج بحريم و شکست خويش بر دوشيم ما
*
THE UNFAITHFUL LOVER
*
This long poem in two parts is highly mystical and, for that reason, difficult to understand. However, this introduction and the explanatory notes may help in understanding it. In the first part `Allamah Iqbal mentions the apparent contradictions in his character, in that he claims to love God but is also involved in the love of many created objects, including human beings. In the second part he explains that there is no contradiction in his claim, and that the appreciation and love of created objects exists only on account of his Love for God and leads him towards his ultimate goal. This poem is a continuation of the previous one. This thought can be extended to any person who is a true Mu'min. Such a person's love for God's creation is really a reflection of his Love for God.
*
@ (Part 1)

O Iqbal ! You are a strange mixture of opposites
You are the elegance of assembly’s crowd as well as alone

O lunatic with colorful song ! Your struggles and efforts $1
Are the garden’s beauty as well as wilderness’ adornment

You are the associate of stars due to your flight’s elegance
O land traveler your steps also traverse the sky

Your forehead is in prostration in the midst of preoccupation with wine
In your system are some colors of the system of goblets also

Like flower’s fragrance you are devoid of color’s dress
Though you are a creator of wisdom you are also insane $2

Like waves you are running to the destination without foot-prints
And then you are also left behind like the sea-shore $3

Female beauty has the effect of electricity for your nature
And strangely enough your loves are unconventional also $4

Your existence depends on the amusement’s law
Are you prostrating only at a single door step?

Among the beautiful you are famous for infidelity
O fickle-minded! You are famous as well as infamous

You have come into the world with mercury’s nature
Your restlessness is lovable, you are very restless

@ (Part-2)

What the disturbance of love has turned into wilderness
I keep that handful of dust concealed under the cloak

It has thousands of facets, each of a different color
I keep such a multi-faceted diamond in my breast

The poet’s heart, is but intoxication’s toil and hustle
What do you know, what I keep inside my breast!

In every intoxication of Love there is a new effulgence of Longing
I am restless, I have a heart unacquainted with rest

Though a new beauty every moment is the sight’s object
I have a firm covenant of fidelity with the Beauty $5

Beniaza has created my nature's Niaz
I keep the struggle for the Longing like the zephyr $6

The spectacle of a single flying spark
Cannot be assuasive as I have a thunderous heart

What may fulfill every demand of the nature of Love
Ah! Attainment of that Perfect Effulgence is my aim

The search for the Whole misguides me into It’s parts
The Beauty is boundless, I have the incurable pathos $7

My life depends upon Love's extreme compassion
But I keep the Love free of customs of fidelity $8

The truth is that lack of imagination produces fidelity $9
I have a new Resurrection Day ever fresh in my heart

Cup‑bearer's bounty is like dew, heart's capacity demands oceans
I am always thirsty, I have a burning fire under my foot

By creating me He created His own critic
As a picture, I have complaint against my Painter $10

If the Beauty was so short‑lived in existence' assembly
Why then do I keep such a boundless imagination?

I am constantly struggling in the Longing's wilderness
I am the ocean's wave, I carry my destruction on my shoulder $11
*
1. These Persian and Arabic equivalents of "lunatic" are often used for lovers.

2. Same as reference 1.

3. This means that though you claim to pursue the path of the Love of God, which ultimately leads to Fana Fiallah you are also involved in the love of material objects of the universe, including human beings. Is this not anomalous?

4. As you have "`Ishq-i-Majaza ", including "Husn‑i‑Niswan " or female beauty you really do not follow the customs of fidelity.

5. Though I love the beauty of every new object of the material universe I possess the everlasting Love of God in my heart.

6. Beniaza ( freedom from need, which is an attribute of God ) has created the opposite nature of "niaz" (or being in need) in me. This needfulness has created the longing for the Sight of God, which is my strongest need and for which I am wandering around like zephyr. This thought extends to the next two verses.

7. According to the theory of "Wahdat al‑Shuhud" God is the Whole or Real Being and has a real Existence while the material objects of the universe are merely the reflections of this Being. In my search for God I am temporarily misguided to the objects of the material world. However, my objective is always kept in view which guides me back to the right path.

8. For the reasons mentioned in note 7, though I appreciate and love the material objects of the universe I keep that love free of the custom of fidelity. This guides me away from them and towards the object of my real Love, i.e. God.

9. People practice fidelity in their love for material objects, like human beings, because of their lack of power of imagination on account of which they do not realize that the material objects do not have a real existence and are merely reflections of the Divine Beauty.

10. Allusion to the anomaly that though Man has been created by God he always criticizes his Creator.

11. This is an extremely beautiful metaphor. The ocean waves harbor their destruction in their existence, which occurs when they reach the shore. Similarly, my creation and existence as a human being harbor the potential for my destruction on reaching the life's end. Cf.

(183) In my creation itself concealed a phase of destruction was
The substance of barn's lightning concealed in the farmer's toil is Ghalib
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-13.MP3
*
@ (1)

Hai Ajab Majmooa-e-Azdad Ae Iqbal To
Ronaq-e-Hangama Mehfil Bhi Hai, Tanha Bhi Hai



Tere Hangamon Se Ae Diwana-e-Rangeen Nawa!
Zeenat-e-Gulshan Bhi Hai, Araish-e-Sehra Bhi Hai



Hum Nasheen Taron Ka Hai Tu Riffat-e-Parwaz Se
Ae Zameen Farsa, Qadam Tera Falak Pema Bhi Hai



Ayn Shugal-e-Mai Mein Preshani Teri Sajda Raiz
Kuch Tere Maslik Mein Rang-e-Mashrab-e-Meena Bhi Hai



Misl-e-Boo-e-Gul Libas-e-Rang Se Uryan Hai Tu
Hai Tu Hikmat Afreen, Lekin Tujhe Soda Bhi Hai



Janib-e-Manzil Rawan Be-Naqsh-e-Pa Manind-e-Mouj
Aur Phir Uftada Misl-e-Sahil-e-Darya Bhi Hai



Husn-e-Niswani Hai Bijli Teri Fitrat Ke Liye
Phir Ajab Ye Hai Ke Tera Ishq Be Parwa Bhi Hai



Teri Hasti Ka Hai Aaeen-e-Taffanan Par Madar
Tu Kabhi Aik Astane Par Jabeen Farsa Bhi Hai?



Hai Haseenon Mein Wafa Na-Ashna Tera Khitab
Ae Talawwun Kaesh! Tu Mashoor Bhi, Ruswa Bhi Hai



Le Ke Aya Hai Jahan Mein Adat-e-Seemab Tu
Teri Betaabi Ke Sadqe, Hai Ajab Betaab Tu



@ (2)



Ishq Ki Ashuftagi Ne Kar Diya Sehra Jise
Musht-e-Khak Aesi Nahan Zair-e-Qaba Rakhta Hun Main



Hain Hazaron Iss Ke Pehlu, Rang Har Pehlu Ka Aur
Seene Mein Heera Koi Tarsha Huwa Rakhta Hun Main



Dil Nahin Shayar Ka, Hai Kaifiyat Ki Rastkhair
Kya Khabar Tujh Ko, Durun-e-Seena Kya Rakhta Hun Main



Arzoo Har Kafiat Mein Ek Naye Jalwe Ke Hai
Muztarib Hun, Dil Sukoon Na-Ashna Rakhta Hun Main



Go Haseen-e-Taza Hai Har Lehza Maqsood-e-Nazar
Husn Se Mazboot Peman-e-Wafa Rakhta Hun Main



Be-Niazi Se Hai Paida Meri Fitrat Ka Niaz
Souz-o-Saaz-e-Justujoo Misl-e-Saba Rakhta Hun Main



Mujab-e-Taskeen Tamashaye Sharar-e-Jasta Ae
Ho Nahin Sakta Ke Dil Barq Ashna Rakhta Hun Main

Har Taqaza Ishq Ki Fitrat Ka Ho Jis Se Khamosh
Aah! Woh Kamil Tajalli Mudda Rakhta Hun Main



Justujoo Kul Ki Liye Phirti Hai Ajza Mein Mujhe
Husn Be-Payan Hai, Dard-e-La-Dawa Rakhta Hun Main



Zindagi Ulfat Ki Dard Anjamiyon Se Hai Meri
Ishq Ko Azad-e-Dastoor-e-Wafa Rakhta Hun Main



Such Agar Puche To Aflas-e-Takhiyul Hai Wafa
Dil Mein Har Dam Ek Naya Mehshar Bipa Rakhta Hun Main



Faiz-e-Saqi Shabnam Aasa, Zarf-e-Dil Darya Talab
Tashna-e-Dayem Hun Atish Zair-e-Pa Rakhta Hun Main



Mujh Ko Paida Kar Ke Apna Nukta-Cheen Paida Kiya
Naqsh Hun, Apne Musawwar Se Gila Rakhta Hun Main



Mehfil-e-Hasti Mein Jab Aesa Tunk Jalwa Tha Husn
Phir Takhiyyul Kis Liye La-Intiha Rakhta Hun Main



Dar Byanban-e-Talab Pewasta Mee Kosheeyam Ma
Mouj-e-Beheriyam-o-Shikast-e-Khowesh Bar Dosheyam Ma
*
