کوشش نا تما م
*
فرقت آفتاب ميں کھاتي ہے پيچ و تاب صبح
چشم شفق ہے خوں فشاں اختر شام کے ليے
رہتي ہے قيس روز کو ليلي شام کي ہوس
اختر صبح مضطرب تاب دوام کے ليے
کہتا تھا قطب آسماں قافلہ نجوم سے
ہمرہو ، ميں ترس گيا لطف خرام کے ليے
سوتوں کو نديوں کا شوق ، بحر کا نديوں کو عشق
موجہء بحر کو تپش ماہ تمام کے ليے
حسن ازل کہ پردہء لالہ و گل ميں ہے نہاں
کہتے ہيں بے قرار ہے جلوہء عام کے ليے
راز حيات پو چھ لے خضر خجستہ گام سے
زندہ ہر ايک چيز ہے کوشش ناتمام سے
*
THE UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORT
*
This short but beautiful poem brings out an important component of `Allamah Iqbal’s philosophy, viz. that everything is ardently desirous of exhibiting itself. He calls this desire, and the efforts to achieve it, as the very source of real life. The climax is reached in the fifth verse according to which God Himself is anxious to manifest Himself to Man but it is only the human effort which would reveal Him to an individual, if the latter so desires and works for. This is a message to the Muslim youth to develop the philosophy of life in which the goal is unattainable. Outwardly, any effort at achieving such a goal appears futile but it is not so in reality. Really speaking it is not the goal but the longing which is never satisfied.
*
The dawn is vexed by separation from the sun
The twilight's eye is raining blood for the evening star

The day's Qais has the pining for the night's Lailah $1
The morning star is restless for perpetual radiance

The sky's polar star was saying to the stars' caravan
"Companions ! I am tantalized for the pleasure of walking"

Springs desire rivers, rivers love the ocean
The ocean wave is in love with the full moon

The eternal Beauty which is veiled in tulips and roses
Is considered to be restless for general manifestation

Ask Khizar $2 of blessed steps for the secret of life
Everything is alive with un-achieved effort $3
*
1. Qais or Majnun and Lailah.

2. Khizar.

3. An important attribute of Khizar A.S. is his traditional restlessness and incessant activism (See Poem 144. "Khizar-i-Rah, Jawab-i-Khizar, Sahra Navarda" (The Traveler's Guide, The Response of Khizar, Wandering in the Wilderness). Similarly an object is living only as long as it is in incessant search of its Creator and "activism" is that effort. It becomes lifeless if it loses these attributes and it will disappear once it finds the Creator.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-14.mp3
*
Furqat-e-Aftab Mein Khati Hai Paich-o-Taab Subha
Chasm-e-Shafaq Hai Khoon Fashan Akhtar-e-Shaam Ke Liye



Rehti Hai Qais-e-Roz Ko Laila-e-Sham Ki Hawas
Akhtar-e-Subah Muztarib Taab-e-Dawam Ke Liye



Kehta Tha Qutb-e-Asman Qafla-e-Najoom Se
Humraho, Main Taras Gya Lutf-e-Kharaam Ke Liye



Soton Ko Naddiyon Ka Shauq, Behar Ka Naddiyon Ko Ishq
Moja-e-Behar Ko Tapish Mah-e-Tamam Ke Liye



Husn-e-Azal Ke Parda-e-Lala-o-Gul Mein Hai Nihan
Kehte Hain Be-Qarar Hai Jalwa-e-Aam Ke Liye



Raaz-e-Hayat Puch Le Khizr-e-Khajasta Gaam Se
Zinda Har Aik Cheez Hai Kosish-e-Natamam Se
*
