بلاد اسلاميہ
*
سرزميں دلي کي مسجود دل غم ديدہ ہے
ذرے ذرے ميں لہو اسلاف کا خوابيدہ ہے
پاک اس اجڑے گلستاں کي نہ ہو کيونکر زميں
خانقاہ عظمت اسلام ہے يہ سرزميں
سوتے ہيں اس خاک ميں خير الامم کے تاجدار
نظم عالم کا رہا جن کي حکومت پر مدار
دل کو تڑپاتي ہے اب تک گرمي محفل کي ياد
جل چکا حاصل مگر محفوظ ہے حاصل کي ياد
ہے زيارت گاہ مسلم گو جہان آباد بھي
اس کرامت کا مگر حق دار ہے بغداد بھي
يہ چمن وہ ہے کہ تھا جس کے ليے سامان ناز
لالہ صحرا جسے کہتے ہيں تہذيب حجاز
خاک اس بستي کي ہو کيونکر نہ ہمدوش ارم
جس نے ديکھے جانشينان پيمبر کے قدم
جس کے غنچے تھے چمن ساماں ، وہ گلشن ہے يہي
کاپنتا تھا جن سے روما ، ان کا مدفن ہے يہي
ہے زمين قرطبہ بھي ديدہء مسلم کا نور
ظلمت مغرب ميں جو روشن تھي مثل شمع طور
بجھ کے بزم ملت بيضا پريشاں کر گئي
اور ديا تہذيب حاضر کا فروزاں کر گئي
قبر اس تہذيب کي يہ سر زمين پاک ہے
جس سے تاک گلشن يورپ کي رگ نم ناک ہے
خطہ قسطنطنيہ يعني قيصر کا ديار
مہدي امت کي سطوت کا نشان پائدار
صورت خاک حرم يہ سر زميں بھي پاک ہے
آستان مسند آرائے شہ لولاک ہے
نکہت گل کي طرح پاکيزہ ہے اس کي ہوا
تربت ايوب انصاري سے آتي ہے صدا
اے مسلماں! ملت اسلام کا دل ہے يہ شہر
سينکڑوں صديوں کي کشت و خوں کا حاصل ہے يہ شہر
وہ زميں ہے تو مگر اے خواب گاہ مصطفي
ديد ہے کعبے کو تيري حج اکبر سے سوا
خاتم ہستي ميں تو تاباں ہے مانند نگيں
اپني عظمت کي ولادت گاہ تھي تيري زميں
تجھ ميں راحت اس شہنشاہ معظم کو ملي
جس کے دامن ميں اماں اقوام عالم کو ملي
نام ليوا جس کے شاہنشاہ عالم کے ہوئے
جانشيں قيصر کے ، وارث مسند جم کے ہوئے
ہے اگر قوميت اسلام پابند مقام
ہند ہي بنياد ہے اس کي ، نہ فارس ہے ، نہ شام
آہ يثرب! ديس ہے مسلم کا تو ، ماوا ہے تو
نقطہ جاذب تاثر کي شعاعوں کا ہے تو
جب تلک باقي ہے تو دنيا ميں ، باقي ہم بھي ہيں
صبح ہے تو اس چمن ميں گوہر شبنم بھي ہيں
*
THE ISLAMIC CITIES
*
The rise and fall of he Muslim Ummah was a very favorite topic with ‘Allamah Iqbal. His pride at the achievements of the Ummah during the period of its glory knew no bounds, and similar was his grief at its decline and degeneration down to his days. The latest wound to his heart was the destruction of the Uthmaniyah Khilafah and its dismemberment into secular nation states. This tragedy was, in a great measure, brought about by the untimely rebellion of the Arab world, which can only be called a treason. However, the purpose of bringing both these aspects to the Muslim Ummah’s attention was to remind it of its past glory and to persuade it to start the difficult but not impossible task of reformation which would lead to its rejuvenation and renaissance. This poem is one such effort, and deals with just one aspect of the Islamic civilization, viz. the grandeur of its cities.
*
The region of Delhi $1 is adored by my grieved heart
In every speck of it the ancestors’ blood is asleep

Why should not the land of this desolate garden be holy?
This region is the shrine of the grandeur of Islam

Kings of the Khair al-Umam $2 are asleep in this land
Dependent on whose rule remained the world order

Memory of assembly’s warmth still renders the heart restless
The splendor has been burnt but memory of the splendor is still secure

Though Jahanabad $3 also is a shrine for the Muslim
Baghdad $4 as well is deserving of this magnificence

This is the garden the source of whose pride was
The wild tulip which was called the culture of Hijaz

Why should not the dust of this habitation be equivalent to Iram $5
Which witnessed the footsteps of the Prophet’s successors

The garden whose flower buds were the garden’s wealth is this
The grave yard of those who made Rome tremble is this $6

The land of Qurtubah $7 also is the light of the Muslim’s eye
Which shined in Europe’s darkness like the candle of tur $8

Extinguishing of this lamp dispersed the assembly of Millat-i-Baiza $9
And lighted the lamp of the present day’s materialistic civilization

This holy region is the grave of that civilization
With which the life blood still exists in the veins of Europe’s vines $10

The tract of Constantinople $11, that is the Caesar’s city
The perpetual banner of the grandeur of the Ummah’s Mahda $12

Like the Haram’s dust this region is also holy
It is the shrine of descendants of Shah-i-Lawlak $13

Its breeze is holy like the fragrance of rose
A voice is calling from the tomb of Ayyub Ansara $14

“O Muslim! this city is the heart of the Nation of Islam !
This city is the reward for millenniums of blood sacrifices!”

But you are that land, O the resting place of Mustafa
Even to the Ka`bah whose sight is better than Hajj-i-Akbar $15

In the world’s ring you are shining like a gem
Your land was the birth place of our grandeur

That Magnificent Emperor got rest in your midst
Under whose protection the world nations got security

Whose successors became rulers of world’s empires
Became successors of Caesar, inheritors of Jam’s throne $16

If the Muslim nationalism is restricted to place
Neither India nor Persia nor Syria is its base

Ah Yathrib! $17 You are the Muslim’s homeland and his shelter
You are the focal point of the rays of his inner feelings

As long as you exist, we will also flourish in the world
You are the morning of this garden we are the dew’s pearls $18
*
1. Delhi- Delhi was also called Shahjahanabad or Jahanabad after its re-establishment by the famous Mughal Emperor, Shahjahan (reigned 1627-57). Except for short periods of time it was the capital of several Muslim dynasties for a period of 664 years from 1193 to 1857. It was conquered by Sulèan Quèb al-Dan Aibak in 1193 who made it his capital, and was lost to the British in 1857 after the unfortunate defeat of the India’s freedom fighters in the first war of independence. During this long period it was not only the political capital of the Muslim India but was also a showpiece of their cultural, social and intellectual progress and achievements. It was not only the seat of some of the best and most powerful emperors of India, as is exhibited by its buildings and other historical relics, but was also the rendezvous of the best spiritual, ecclesiastical and temporal scholars of the world. Qureshi (1942) says, “ It is now being gradually recognized that the Sultanate was a part of the greater world of Islam, that it possessed intimate sources of knowledge about the rest of the Muslim world, in particular the Eastern lands, and that the history and institutions of the empire of Delhi cannot be properly understood if they are separated from the general background of Islamic History.” (p. vi). “ Delhi became the most enlightened city of the East and the fame of the Sultanate spread into the four corners of the Muslim world” (p. 5). This status of Delhi entitles it to be the starting point of this poem.

During the greater part of the suzerainty of Muslims the Muslim world has consisted of three important regions, viz (1) the Eastern region with its center at Delhi, (ii) the Central region with its center at Baghdad and Qusèunèuniyah (Constantinople) and (iii) the Western region with its centre at Qurtubah (Cordoba) in Islamic Spain. ‘Allamah Iqbal describes the glories of all of them in this poem. This is followed by his tribute to Madanah Munawwarah and Makkah Mu‘aïïamah which are the original spiritual centers of the Islamic world and the Muslim’s heart.

2. “Khair al-Umam-” The title of the Muslim Ummah as is conferred on them by the Holy Qur’an 3:110.

3. Same as refernce no. 1

4. Baghdad- it is one of the world’s oldest cities and is situated in Iraq. It remained the capital of the Abbasid Dynasty for about 450 years from the middle of the eighth to the middle of the twelfth centuries. For this period it is well known for its achievements in the fields of learning, art and culture as well as its cosmopolitan nature. Though it preceded Delhi’s glory it was in no way different from that.

5. Iram- This was a famous garden in Yemen, established on the model of Paradise by Shaddad, an ancient king. This word is also used for Paradise.

6. Allusion to the struggle of the Muslim mujahids whose struggle in the cause of God and Islam shook up and ultimately destroyed the Eastern or the Byzantine part of the Roman Empire.

7. Qurèubah (Cordova)- This important city in north-central Spain was the capital of the Muslim Khilafah in Andalus (Spain) for about three centuries from the middle of the eighth to the middle of the eleventh centuries. During this period its contribution to the strength of the Muslims and Islam in Spain as well as its rich and intellectual culture is famous. ‘Allamah Iqbal was very much moved during his visit to Spain in 1933, which is reflected in several poems in his book Bal-i-Jibral, the most important of which is “Masjid-i-Qurèubah” (written in Spain, particularly in Cordova), which can be appreciated and enjoyed only by reading the poem itself. However, the following two verses are presented as a small sample:

(193) The signal of the Man of God is your majesty and beauty
He has majesty and beauty as you have majesty and beauty

(194) The K’abah of the people of learning! The grandeur of Islam
You have made the Andalus region equal in rank to the Haram

8. Allusion to the leading role of Qurtubah in the spread of knowledge in Europe. Cf.:

(195) Whose vision educating the East and the West was
Whose intellect beacon of light in Europe’s darkness was

9. Millat-i-Baiza - It means “the nation like the illuminated egg ”, which comes from the bright egg-shaped mark on the palm of S. Musa A.S. Conferred by God at Mount tur ( The Holy Qur’an 27:12). ‘Allamah Iqbal has frequently used this name for the Muslim Ummah.

10. Allusion to the fact that Europe’s material and intellectual progress is the result of the light of learning radiating from Cordova and its educational institutions which brought about the Reformation and Renaissance in Europe.

11. Qusèunèuniyah (Constantinople)- This the third of the Muslim city which saw the beauty and grandeur of the Muslim world. It was the capital of the Uthmaniya Khilafah from 1453 to 1921. It was originally established by the Romans and called Constantinople by them after the Emperor Constantine (280-337). This is referred to in the first hemistich of this verse.

12. Allusion to the Holy Prophet S.A.W.

13. Shah-i-Lawlak- This is the title of the Holy Prophet S.A.W which comes from a Hadith-i-Qudsi, “ If I had not intended to create thee (the Holy Prophet S.A.W) I would have not created the universe”.

14. Abu Ayyub Ansara R.A.- He was an eminent companion of the Holy Prophet S.A.W, who was martyred in a battle for the conquest of Constantinople during the Khilafah of Mu`awiyah R.A.

15. Hajj-i-Akbar- The Muslim pilgrimage to Makkah Mu`aïïamah which falls on a Friday and is considered to be equal to a thousand pilgrimages.

16. Allusion to the fact that Muslims conquered and have ruled, since the seventh century lands which once formed the mighty Roman and Persian Empires.

17. Yathrib- The original name of Madanah Munawwarah which is also used as an alternate name.

18. This is a beautiful metaphor of the morning and its beauty created by the morning’s dew whose droplets shine like pearls. Just as the morning dew lends beauty to the morning, Muslims added beauty to the world (metaphor of a garden used) by shining like dew drops.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-01.mp3
*
Sarzameen Dilli Ki Masjood-E-Dil-E-Gham Didah Hai
Zarre Zarre Mein Lahoo Aslaaf Ka Khawabidah Hai



Paak Iss Ujhre Gulistan Ki Na Ho Kyunkar Zameen
Khanqah-E-Azmat-E-Islam Hai Ye Sarzameen



Sote Hain Iss Khaak Mein Khair-Ul-Ummam Ke Tajdar
Nazam-E-Alam Ka Raha Jin Ki Hukumat Par Madar



Dil Ko Tarpati Hai Ab Taak Garmi-E-Mehfil Ki Yaad
Jal Chuka Hasil Magar Mehfooz Hai Hasil Ki Yaad



Hai Ziaratgah-E-Muslim Go Jahan Abad Bhi
Iss Karamat Ka Magar Haqdar Hai Baghdad Bhi



Ye Chaman Woh Hai Ke Tha Jis Ke Liye Saman-E-Naz
Lala’ay Sehra Jise Kehte Hain Tehzeeb-E-Hijaz



Khak Iss Basti Ki Ho Kyunkar Na Humdosh-E-Iram
Jis Ne Dekhe Janasheenan-E-Peyambar (S.A.W.W.) Ke Qadam



Jis Ke Gunche The Chaman Saman, Woh Gulshan Hai Yehi
Kanpta Tha Jin Se Roma, Un Ka Madfan Hai Yehi



Hai Zameen-E-Qurtuba Bhi Didah-E-Muslim Ka Noor
Zulmat-E-Maghrib Mein Jo Roshan Thi Misl-E-Shama-E-Toor



Bujh Ke Bazm-E-Millat-E-Baiza Preshan Kar Gyi
Aur Diya Tehzeeb-E-Hazir Ka Farozaan Kar Gyi



Qabar Uss Tehzeeb Ki Ye Sarzameen-E-Paak Hai
Jis Se Taak-E-Gulshan-E-Yourap Ki Rag Namnaak Hai



Khitta-E-Qustuntuniya Yani Qaisar Ka Diyar
Mehdi-E-Ummat Ki Satwat Ka Nishan-E-Paidar



Soorat-E-Khaak-E-Haram Ye Sarzameen Bhi Paak Hai
Astaan-E-Masnad Araye Shah-E-Loulaak (S.A.W.W.) Hai



Nikhat-E-Gul Ki Tarah Pakeezah Hai Iss Ki Hawa
Turbat-E-Ayub Ansari (R.A.) Se Ati Hai Sada



Ae Musalman! Millat-E-Islam Ka Dil Hai Ye Shehar
Saikron Sadiyon Ki Kusht-O-Khoon Ka Hasil Hai Ye Shehar



Woh Zameen Hai Tu Magar Ae Khawab Gah-E-Mustafa (S.A.W.W.)
Deed Hai Kaabe Ko Teri Hajj-E-Akbar Se Sawa



Khatam-E-Hasti Mein Tu Taban Hai Manind-E-Nageen
Apni Azmat Ki Waladat Gah Thi Teri Zameen



Tujh Mein Rahat Uss Shehanshah-E-Moazam (S.A.W.W.) Ko Mili
Jis Ke Daman Mein Aman Aqwam-E-Alam Ko Mili



Naam Lewa Jis Ke Shahanshah Alam Ke Huway
Janasheen Qaisar Ke, Waris Masnad-E-Jim Ke Huway



Hai Agar Qoumiat-E-Islam Paband-E-Maqam
Hind Hi Bunyaad Hai Iss Ki, Na Faris Hai, Na Shaam



Ah Yasrib! Dais Hai Muslim Ka Tu, Mawa Hai Tu
Nukta’ay Jazib Tassar Ki Shuaon Ka Hai Tu



Jab Talak Baqi Hai Tu Dunya Mein, Baqi Hum Bhi Hain
Subah Hai Tou Iss Chaman Mein Gohar-E-Shabnam Bhi Hain
*
