ستارہ
*
قمر کا خوف کہ ہے خطرہء سحر تجھ کو
مآل حسن کي کيا مل گئي خبر تجھ کو؟
متاع نور کے لٹ جانے کا ہے ڈر تجھ کو
ہے کيا ہراس فنا صورت شرر تجھ کو؟
زميں سے دور ديا آسماں نے گھر تجھ کو
مثال ماہ اڑھائي قبائے زر تجھ کو
!غضب ہے پھر تري ننھي سي جان ڈرتي ہے
تمام رات تري کانپتے گزرتي ہے
چمکنے والے مسافر! عجب يہ بستي ہے
جو اوج ايک کا ہے ، دوسرے کي پستي ہے
اجل ہے لاکھوں ستاروں کي اک ولادت مہر
فنا کي نيند مے زندگي کي مستي ہے
وداع غنچہ ميں ہے راز آفرينش گل
!عدم ، عدم ہے کہ آئينہ دار ہستي ہے
سکوں محال ہے قدرت کے کارخانے ميں
ثبات ايک تغير کو ہے زمانے ميں
*
THE STAR
*
This short and apparently simple nature poem contains the very important subject of the origin, nature and end of matter. It has been controversial since the time of Aristotelian logic whether matter is hadith or qadam. Sophisticated arguments exist on both sides. However, far from solving the problem they have left the readers confused and arguing with each other. This is one of the enigmas for comprehending which Divine guidance is needed. The Holy Qur’an states that (i) matter is no eternal but has been created by God, is constantly changing in form and is being re-created, and (ii) though matter has not been destroyed since its creation it will be destroyed on the Last Day. (The Holy Qur’an 10:4; 14:48; 17:49; 21:104; 27:60-66; 29:19-20; and 35:16.) The climax of the thesis is reached in the last verse of the poem. ‘Allamah Iqbal has dealt with this matter in several poems. Cf.

(196) This universe is perhaps still being completed
Because the call of ”Kun fa Yakun ” is still echoing

(197) Mere optical illusion is this quietude
Restless is every speck of the universe

The constant appearance of new forms of life at all taxonomic levels of plants and animals and the constant appearance of new stars. constellations and galaxies testify to the correctness of the first verse. Similarly, the constant movement of matter along fixed orbits from the sub-atomic elementary particles to the planets, stars, constellations and galaxies supports the second verse.
*
Are you afraid of the moon or the dawn?
Are you conscious of the end of beauty?

Are you afraid of being robbed of light’s wealth?
Are you afraid of annihilation like the spark?

The sky has settled you far from the earth
It has wrapped you in gold’s mantle like the moon

It is outrageous that your feeble life is still in fear
Your whole night passes in trembling with fear $1

O shining traveler! This habitation is strange
The rise of one leads to the fall of the other

The birth of one sun is the death of a myriad stars
Annihilation’s sleep is the ecstasy of life’s wine

Flower bud’s departure is the secret of flower’s birth
Is annihilation life’s end, or is the equivalent of life!

Quiescence is difficult in the universe
Only change is permanent in the universe
*
1. The reply to the questions in the first three verses is obviously in the negative. In that case the fourth verse expresses surprise at the conditions stated in it. The amazement is satisfied in the last four verses according to which all creation, irrespective of it’s beauty and station in the universe is ephemeral and is destined to die or be annihilated.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-02.mp3
*

Qamar Ka Khof Ke Hai Khatra-e-Sehar Tujh Ko

Maal-e-Husn Ki Kya Mil Gyi Khabar Tujh Ko?

Mataa-e-Noor Ke Lut Jane Ka Hai Dar Tujh Ko

Hai Kya Haras-e-Fana Soorat-e-Sharar Tujh Ko?

Zameen Se Door Diya Aasman Ne Ghar Tujh Ko

Misal-e-Mah Urhayi Qabaye Zar Tujh Ko

Ghazab Hai Phir Teri Nanhi Si Jaan Derti Hai!

Tamam Raat Teri Kanpte Guzerti Hai

Chamakne Wale Musafir! Ajeeb Ye Basti Hai

Jo Auj Aik Ka Hai, Dosre Ki Pasti Hai

Ajal Hai Lakhon Sitaron Ki Ek Waladat-e-Mehr

Fana Ki Neend Mai-e-Zindagi Ki Masti Hai

Widaa-e-Ghuncha Mein Hai Raaz-e-Afrainash-e-Gul

Adam, Adam Hai Ke Aaeena Daar-e-Hasti Hai!

Sukoon Muhal Hai Qudrat Ke Kaarkhane Mein

Sabat Aik Taghiyur Ko Hai Zamane Mein
*
