تضمين بر شعر انيسي شاملو
*
ہميشہ صورت باد سحر آوارہ رہتا ہوں
محبت ميں ہے منزل سے بھي خوشتر جادہ پيمائي
دل بے تاب جا پہنچا ديار پير سنجر ميں
ميسر ہے جہاں درمان درد نا شکيبائي
ابھي نا آشنائے لب تھا حرف آرزو ميرا
زباں ہونے کو تھي منت پذير تاب گويائي
يہ مرقد سے صدا آئي ، حرم کے رہنے والوں کو
!شکايت تجھ سے ہے اے تارک آئين آبائي
ترا اے قيس کيونکر ہوگيا سوز دروں ٹھنڈا
کہ ليلي ميں تو ہيں اب تک وہي انداز ليلائي
نہ تخم 'لا الہ' تيري زمين شور سے پھوٹا
زمانے بھر ميں رسوا ہے تري فطرت کي نازائي
تجھے معلوم ہے غافل کہ تيري زندگي کيا ہے
کنشتي ساز، معمور نوا ہائے کليسائي
ہوئي ہے تربيت آغوش بيت اللہ ميں تيري
دل شوريدہ ہے ليکن صنم خانے کا سودائي
وفا آموختي از ما، بکار ديگراں کر دي ''
''ربودي گوہرے از ما نثار ديگراں کر دي
*
TADMIN ON A VERSE OF ANISI SHAMLU
*
Though he was only an official in the Accounts Department of the Mughal Army in India during the times of Mirza `Abd al-Raham Khan-i-Khanan and Emperor Jalal al-Dan Akbar (reigned 1560-1605) he was an eminent poet also. This is proved by his elegy written by Naïara Nishapura. The present poem is based on the opening verse of one of Shamlu’s ghazals. That verse appears as the last verse of this poem. This poem allegorically describes ‘Allamah Iqbal’s disappointment at the backsliding of Muslims and their failure to measure up to the standards of being the vice-gerents of God on earth. The climax is reached in the last verse.
*
I always remain roaming like the morning breeze
Roaming is more pleasant in Love than destination $1

The restless heart reached the land of the Saint of Sanjar $2
Where the cure for the malady of impatience is available

The longing of my heart had not yet reached the lips
The tongue was about to be obligated to the power of speech

A voice came from the tomb, “The Haram’s inhabitants have
A complaint against you, O renouncer of ancestors’ ways!

O Qais $3 ! How has your internal warmth cooled down?
Because Lailah $4 still has the same ways of her old self

The seed of “La Ilaha” $5 did not sprout in your barren soil
The sterility of your nature is universally disgraced

O imprudent one! Do you know what your life is?
It is the builder of synagogues, full of church music

Though your training has been in the House of God
Your rebellious heart is the lover of temple

“You learnt fidelity from us but used it on others
You snatched a pearl from us but sacrificed it on others”
*
1. This concept is common in ‘Allamah Iqbal’s works. Cf.

(198) Though the caravan is enamored by the rest at the stage
Greater than the stage’s comfort is the journey’s pleasure

2. this is another name of Khawajah Mu`an al-Dan Chishta R.A.

3. Qais or Majnun and Lailah- They are the hero and heroine respectively of the famous epic of love, known as “Lailah O Majnun” by Ilyas Ibn Yusuf Niïama (d. 1209).

4. Same as last reference

5. La Ilaha- This is the abbreviation for “La Ilaha Il Allah, Muhammad al-Rasul Allah”, which is the creed of Islam.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-06.MP3
*


Hamesha Soorat-e-Bad-e-Sehar Awara Rehta Hun

Mohabbat Mein Hai Manzil Se Bhi Khaushtar Jadah Pemayi

Dil-e-Betab Ja Pohancha Diyar-e-Peer-e-Sanjar Mein

Muyassar Hai Jahan Darman-e-Dard-e-Nashakeebai


Abhi Na-Ashnaye Lab Tha Harf-e-Arzoo Mera

Zuban Hone Ko Thi Minnat Pazeer-e-Taab-e-Goyai

Ye Marqad Se Sada Ayi, Haram Ke Rehne Walon Ko

Shikayat Tujh Se Hai Ae Tarik-e-Aaeen-e-Aabayi !

Tera Ae Qais Kyunkar Ho Gya Souz-e-Daroon Thanda

Ke Laila Mein To Hain Ab Tak Wohi Andaz-e-Lailayi

Na Tukhm-e-‘La Ilaha’ Teri Zameen-e-Shor Se Phoota

Zamane Bhar Mein Ruswa Hai Teri Fitrat Ki Nazayi

Tujhe Maaloom Hai Ghafil Ke Teri Zindagi Kya Hai

Kunishti Saaz, Maamoor-e-Nawa Haye Kaleesai

Huwi Hai Tarbiat Aghosh-e-Bait Ullah Mein Teri

Dil Shourida Hai Lekin Sanam Khane Ka Soudai

“Wafa Aamo Khasti Azma” Bakar-e-Deegaran Kardi

Rabudi Gohare Azma Nisar-e-Deegran Kardi”
*
