’’در معنی اینکہ افلاطون یونانی کہ تصوف و ادبیات اقوام اسلامیہ 
از افکار او اثر عظیم پذیرفتہ بر مسلک گوسفندی رفتہ است
و از تخیلات او احتراز واجب است‘‘
*
راہب دیرینہ افلاطون حکیم
از گروہ گوسفندان قدیم
رخش او در ظلمت معقول گم
در کہستان وجود افکندہ سم
آنچنان افسون نامحسوس خورد
اعتبار از دست و چشم و گوش برد
گفت سر زندگی در مردن است
شمع را صد جلوہ از افسردن است
بر تخیلہای ما فرمان رواست
جام او خواب آور و گیتی رباست
گوسفندی در لباس آدم است
حکم او بر جان صوفی محکم است
عقل خود را بر سر گردون رساند
عالم اسباب را افسانہ خواند
کار او تحلیل اجزای حیات
قطع شاخ سرو رعنای حیات
فکر افلاطون زیان را سود گفت
حکمت او بود را نابود گفت
فطرتش خوابید و خوابی آفرید
چشم ہوش او سرابی آفرید
بسکہ از ذوق عمل محروم بود
جان او وارفتہ ی معدوم بود
منکر ہنگامہ ی موجود گشت
خالق اعیان نامشہود گشت
زندہ جان را عالم امکان خوش است
مردہ دل را عالم اعیان خوش است
آہوش بی بہرہ از لطف خرام
لذت رفتار بر کبکش حرام
شبنمش از طاقت رم بی نصیب
طایرش را سینہ از دم بی نصیب
ذوق روئیدن ندارد دانہ اش
از طپیدن بی خبر پروانہ اش
راہب ما چارہ غیر از رم نداشت
طاقت غوغای این عالم نداشت
دل بسوز شعلہ ی افسردہ بست
نقش آن دنیای افیون خوردہ بست
از نشیمن سوی گردون پر گشود
باز سوی آشیان نامد فرود
در خم گردون خیال او گم است
من ندانم درد یا خشت خم است
قومہا از سکر او مسموم گشت
خفت و از ذوق عمل محروم گشت
*
TO THE EFFECT THAT PLATO, WHOSE THOUGHT HAS DEEPLY INFLUENCED THE MYSTICISM AND LITERATURE OF ISLAM, FOLLOWED THE SHEEP'S DOCTRINE, AND THAT WE MUST BE ON OUR GUARD AGAINST HIS THEORIES
*
The direct influence of Platonism on Muslim thought has been comparatively slight. When the Muslims began to study Greek philosophy, they turned to Aristotle. The genuine writings of Aristotle. however, were not accessible to them. They studied translations of books passing under his name, which were the work of Neoplatonists, so that what they believed to be Aristotelian doctrine was in fact the philosophy of Plotinus. Proelus, and the later Neoplatonic school. Indirectly, therefore, Plato has profoundly influenced the intellectual and spiritual development of Islam and may be called, if not the father of Mohammedan mysticism, at any rate its presiding genius.
*
PLATO, the prime ascetic and sage.
Was one of that ancient flock of sheep.
His Pegasus went astray in the darkness of idealism
And dropped its shoe amidst the rocks of actuality.
He was so fascinated by the invisible
That he made hand, eye, and ear of no account.
"To die," said he, "is the secret of Life:
The candle is glorified by being put out."
He dominates our thinking,
His cup sends us to sleep and takes the sensible world away from us.
He is a sheep in man's clothing,
The soul of the Sufi bows to his authority.
He soared with his intellect to the highest heaven
And called the world of phenomena a myth.
'Twas his -work to dissolve the structure of Life'
And cut the bough of Life's fair tree asunder.
The thought of Plato regarded loss as profit,
His philosophy declared that being is not-being.
He natures drowsed and created a dream
His mind's eye created a mirage.
Since he was without any taste for action,
His soul was enraptured by the nonexistent.
He disbelieved in the material universe
And became the creator of invisible Ideas.
Sweet is the world of phenomena to be living spirit,
Dear is the world of Ideas to the dead spirit:
Its gazelles have no grave of movement,
Its partridges are denied the pleasure of walking daintily.
Its dewdrops are unable to quiver,
Its birds have no breath in their breasts,
Its seed does not desire to grow,
Its moths do not know how to flutter.
Our recluse had no remedy but flight:
He could not endure the noise of this world.
He set his heart on the glow of a quenched flame
And depicted a word steeped in opium.
He spread his wings towards the sky
And never came down to his nest again.
His fantasy is sunk in the jar of heaven:
I know not whether it is the dregs or brick of the wine-jar. $1
The peoples were poisoned by his intoxication:
He slumbered and took no delight in deeds.
*
1. I.e., it is worthless sg anyhow. In the East a brick is placed beneath or over the wine-jar. Some Muslim writers confuse Plato with Diogenes the Cynic, who is said to have lived in a cask.
*

*

*