ترانہ ملي
*
چين و عرب ہمارا ، ہندوستاں ہمارا
مسلم ہيں ہم ، وطن ہے سارا جہاں ہمارا
توحيد کي امانت سينوں ميں ہے ہمارے
آساں نہيں مٹانا نام و نشاں ہمارا
دنيا کے بت کدوں ميں پہلا وہ گھر خدا کا
ہم اس کے پاسباں ہيں، وہ پاسباں ہمارا
تيغوں کے سائے ميں ہم پل کر جواں ہوئے ہيں
خنجر ہلال کا ہے قومي نشاں ہمارا
مغرب کي واديوں ميں گونجي اذاں ہماري
تھمتا نہ تھا کسي سے سيل رواں ہمارا
باطل سے دنبے والے اے آسماں نہيں ہم
سو بار کر چکا ہے تو امتحاں ہمارا
اے گلستان اندلس! وہ دن ہيں ياد تجھ کو
تھا تيري ڈاليوں پر جب آشياں ہمارا
اے موج دجلہ! تو بھي پہچانتي ہے ہم کو
اب تک ہے تيرا دريا افسانہ خواں ہمارا
اے ارض پاک! تيري حرمت پہ کٹ مرے ہم
ہے خوں تري رگوں ميں اب تک رواں ہمارا
سالار کارواں ہے مير حجاز اپنا
اس نام سے ہے باقي آرام جاں ہمارا
اقبال کا ترانہ بانگ درا ہے گويا
ہوتا ہے جادہ پيما پھر کارواں ہمارا
*
THE MUSLIM NATIONAL ANTHEM
*
This short but beautiful poem does not represent Muslim chauvinism as is alleged by Islam’s enemies. On the other hand, its four-fold message to mankind in general and to Muslims in particular is based on the Holy Qur’an and covers four important subjects. These are (i) universality of Islam, (ii) Mission of the Holy Prophet S.A.W., (iii) Struggle, including fighting, if necessary, in the cause of truth and defense of the weak and the oppressed, (iv) Islamic values. The universality of Islam is evidenced in the Holy Qur’an in which God always calls Himself “Rabb-ul-Alaman’’ (Lord of the whole universe and not that of Muslims or of any race or nation). This message is interspersed throughout the Holy Qur’an. It is contained in verses 1, 4, 7 and 8 of the poem. Verse 2 carries the second message which is based on the Holy Qur’an. 9:33¬; 27:91-93; 30:30; 48:8-10, 28¬ and 61:9¬, of which the three marked with asterisk are very significant. The third message is very important and is oft repeated in the Holy Qur’an (2:190-193, 216, 244; 4:74-76, 84; 8:39, 65; 9:5, 6, 12-16, 19, 20, 29, 33, 81-85, 123; 22:39-41, 78; 25:52; 29:69; 47:4, 20-21; 48:17, 28 and 61: 9. Verses 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the poem contain this message. The whole Qur’an is the exposition of Islamic values. Verses 2, 3, 10 and 11 of the poem contain this thought. For these reasons the poem is very popular among Muslims and is memorized by young boys and girls.
*
China and Arabia are ours, India is also ours
We are Muslims, whole world is homeland of ours

The trust of Divine Unity is in the breasts of ours
It is not easy to destroy the identity of ours

Among the world’s temples that first House of God $1
We are its sentinels, it is the sentinel of ours

We have been brought up under the shade of swords
The crescent’s dagger is the national insignia of ours

Our Adhan echoed in the valleys of the West
None could stop the advancing flood of ours

We cannot be bowed down by falsehood, O sky
Hundreds of times you have done tests of ours

O garden of Andalus $2 ! Do you remember the days
When your branches harbored the nest of ours?

O wave of the Tigris $3 ! You also recognize us
Your river still recites the stories of ours

O Holy Land $4 ! For your honor we fought to the bitter end
Still flowing in your veins is the blood of ours

The Hijaz’s Chief $5 is the commander of our caravan
This name preserves solace of the hearts of ours

This anthem of Iqbal is the clarion’s $6 call so to say
Again prepares for the journey the caravan of ours
*
1. Though man was inhabiting the earth since long and many prophets had brought the message of God the first sanctuary devoted to the worship of the single God was built by S. Ibraham A.S. (The Holy Qur’an 3:96) who lived in the second millennium B.C.

2. Andalus is the Arabic name of Spain. Muslims ruled in Spain for over 700 years from 711 to 1492. Their achievements in art, culture, literature, as well as politico-economic systems are well known to all educated persons. ‘Allamah Iqbal was very much frustrated by the loss of Spain by Muslims for which see the poem “Masjid-i-Qurtubah” (The Mosque of Cordova)

3. Allusion to the battle of Karbalah (680) in which Imam Hussain R.A. was martyred in the defense of truth and perpetuation of the Divinely guided Khilafah..

4. Reference to Palestine and the long struggle for liberation of Jerusalem during Islam’s history and its revival since World War I in which Muslims are consistently making sacrifices.

5. Reference to the Holy Prophet S.A.W.

6. This is also a subtle reference to his book Bang-i- Dara which contains material for the rejuvenation and renaissance of world Muslims.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-09.mp3
*



Cheen-o-Arab Humara, Hindustan Humara

Muslim Hain Hum, Watan Hai Sara Jahan Humara

Touheed Ki Amanat Seenon Mein Hai Humare

Asan Nahin Nitana Naam-o-Nishan Humara

Dunya Ke Butkadon Mein Pehla Woh Ghar Khuda Ka

Hum Uss Ke Pasban Hain, Woh Pasban Humara

Taighon Ke Saye Mein Hum Pal Kar Jawan Huwe Hain

Khanjar Hilal Ka Hai Qoumi Nishan Humara

Maghrib Ki Wadiyon Mein Goonji Azan Humari

Thamta Na Tha Kisi Se Seel-e-Rawan Humara

Batil Se Dabne Wale Ae Asman Nahin Hum

Sou Baar Kar Chuka Hai Tu Imtihan Humara

Ae Gulistan-e-Aundlas ! Woh Din Hain Yaad Tujh Ko

Tha Teri Daliyon Par Jab Ashiyan Humara

Ae Mouj-e-Dajla! Tu Bhi Pehchanti Hai Hum Ko

Ab Tak Hai Tera Darya Afsana Khawan Humara

Ae Arz-e-Pak! Teri Hurmat Pe Kat Mare Hum

Hai Khoon Teri Ragon Mein Ab Tak Rawan Humara

Salar-e-Karwan Hai Meer-e-Hijaz (S.A.W.) Apna

Iss Naam Se Hai Baqi Aram-e-Jaan Humara

Iqbal Ka Tarana Bang-e-Dra Hai Goya

Hota Hai Jadah Pema Phir Karwan Humara
*
