خطاب بہ جوانان اسلام
*
کبھي اے نوجواں مسلم! تدبر بھي کيا تو نے
وہ کيا گردوں تھا تو جس کا ہے اک ٹوٹا ہوا تارا
تجھے اس قوم نے پالا ہے آغوش محبت ميں
کچل ڈالا تھا جس نے پائوں ميں تاج سر دارا
تمدن آفريں خلاق آئين جہاں داري
وہ صحرائے عرب يعني شتربانوں کا گہوارا
سماں 'الفقر فخري' کا رہا شان امارت ميں
''بآب و رنگ و خال و خط چہ حاجت روے زيبا را''
گدائي ميں بھي وہ اللہ والے تھے غيور اتنے
کہ منعم کو گدا کے ڈر سے بخشش کا نہ تھا يارا
غرض ميں کيا کہوں تجھ سے کہ وہ صحرا نشيں کيا تھے
جہاں گير و جہاں دار و جہاں بان و جہاں آرا
اگر چاہوں تو نقشہ کھينچ کر الفاظ ميں رکھ دوں
مگر تيرے تخيل سے فزوں تر ہے وہ نظارا
تجھے آبا سے اپنے کوئي نسبت ہو نہيں سکتي
کہ تو گفتار وہ کردار ، تو ثابت وہ سےارا
گنوا دي ہم نے جو اسلاف سے ميراث پائي تھي
ثريا سے زميں پر آسماں نے ہم کو دے مارا
حکومت کا تو کيا رونا کہ وہ اک عارضي شے تھي
نہيں دنيا کے آئين مسلم سے کوئي چارا
مگر وہ علم کے موتي ، کتابيں اپنے آبا کي
جو ديکھيں ان کو يورپ ميں تو دل ہوتا ہے سيپارا
غني! روز سياہ پير کنعاں را تماشا کن ''
''کہ نور ديدہ اش روشن کند چشم زليخا را
*
ADDRESSED TO THE YOUTH OF ISLAM
*
As has been stated at several places earlier the material as well as spiritual deterioration of the Muslim world was a deep wound to ‘Allamah Iqbal. This is one of the poems expressing its pain. As the youth are the future hope of a nation the poem is addressed to them in the hope that it would rouse them from deep slumber. However, only one aspect of the problem has been stated in this poem, i.e. the Ummah’s distancing itself from Islamic literature and the heritage of their ancestors.
*
O Muslim youth ! Have you ever used your prudence
What was that sky of which you are a fallen star?

That nation has nurtured you its lap of love
Whose feet had trampled the crown of Dara’s $1 head

Civilization’s formulator, creator of rules of world government
Was that desert of Arabia, that is the cradle of camel drivers

“Al Faqru fakhra’s ” $2 state even in glory of authority existed
“Why would the beautiful face need beautifying and cosmetics” $3

Even in poverty those men of God were so high-minded
That the rich could not avoid charity for beggar’s fear

In short what should I tell you what those wanderers in wilderness were
They were world conquerors, world rulers, world administrators, and world adorners

If I wish to present their picture in words I can
But that scene is beyond the comprehension of your imagination

You cannot have any relationship with your ancestors
You are talk, they were action, you are stars, they were planets

We have wasted the heritage obtained from our ancestors
The sky has thrown us down from the Thurayyah $4 to the earth

Why should we cry for suzerainty, as it was temporary
There is no escape from the world’s established principles

But those pearls of wisdom, those books of our ancestors
By seeing them in Europe the heart is rent asunder

“O Ghani $5 ! witness the dark day of the saint of Kina‘an $6
Because the light of his eyes brightens Zulaikhah’s $7 eyes
*
1. Dara or Darius.

2. This is a famous Hadath of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W). It means “Faqr is my pride”. It is difficult to translate Faqr correctly into English. Nevertheless its correct comprehension is necessary to understand this Hadath as well as this verse. Literally it means poverty but in Tasawwuf it is a technical term, which also is difficult to understand.

3. This is the second hemistich of a verse of Hafiï Sharaza ( Khwajah Shams al-Dan of Sharaz ) which is given bellow:

(189) The beauty of the beloved does not need our incomplete love
Why would the beautiful face beautifying and cosmetics need?

4. Thurayyah called the Pleides in English and is a collection of seven stars in the constellation Taurus.

5. Mullah Muhammad óahir Ghana.

6. The Saint of Kina‘an- Allusion to S. Yusuf A.S. for whom see the Holy Qur’an, Surah 12

7. Zalaykhah.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-22.mp3
*


Kabhi Ae Naujawan Muslim, Tadabbur  Bhi Kiya Tu Ne

Woh Kya Gardoon Tha Tu Jis Ka Hai Ek Toota Huwa Tara

Tujhe Iss Qoum Ne Pala Hai Aghosh-e-Muhabbat Mein

Kuchal Dala Tha Jis Ne Paon Mein Taj-e-Sar-e-Dara


Tamaddun Afreen, Khallaq-e-Aaeen-e-Jahandari

Woh Sehra-e-Arab Yani Shutar-Banon Ka Gehwara

Sama ‘Al-Faqru Fakhri’ Ka Raha Shan-e-Amarat Mein

‘Baab-o-Rang-o-Khal-o-Khat Che Hajat Rooye Zaibara’

Gadai Mein Bhi Woh Allah Wale The Ghayoor Itne

Ke Mun’em Ko Gada Ke Dar Se Bakhshish Ka Na Tha Yara

Gharz Main Kya Kahun Tujh Se Ke Woh Sehra Nasheen Kya The

Jahangeer-o-Jahan Dar-o-Jahan Baan-o-Jahan Aara

Agar Chahon To Naqsha Khainch Kar Alfaz Mein Rakh Dun

Magar Tere Takhiyyul Se Se Fazoon Tar Hai Woh Nazara

Tujhe Aaba Se Apne Koi Nisbat Ho Nahin Sakti

Ke Tu Guftar Woh Kirdar, Tu Sabit Woh Sayyara

Ganwa Di Hum Ne Jo Aslaf Se Meeras Payi Thi

Surreya Se Zameen Par Asman Ne Hum Ko De Mara

Hukumat Ka To Kya Rona Ke Woh Ek Aarzi Shay Thi

Nahin Dunya Ke Aaeen-e-Musallam Se Koi Chara

Magar Woh Ilm Ke Moti, Kitabain Apne Aaba Ki

Jo Dekhain In Ko Yourap Mein Tou Dil Hota Hai Seepara

"Ghani Rouz-e-Siyah-e-Peer-e-Kanaan Ra Tamasha Kun

Ke Noor-e-Didah Ash Roshan Kunan Chashm-e-Zulekhara”

*
