خضرراہ
*
ساحل دريا پہ ميں اک رات تھا محو نظر
گوشہ دل ميں چھپائے اک جہان اضطراب
شب سکوت افزا، ہوا آسودہ، دريا نرم سير
تھي نظر حيراں کہ يہ دريا ہے يا تصوير آب
جيسے گہوارے ميں سو جاتا ہے طفل شير خوار
موج مضطر تھي کہيں گہرائيوں ميں مست خواب
رات کے افسوں سے طائر آشيانوں ميں اسير
انجم کم ضو گرفتار طلسم ماہتاب
ديکھتا کيا ہوں کہ وہ پيک جہاں پيما خضر
جس کي پيري ميں ہے مانند سحر رنگ شباب
!کہہ رہا ہے مجھ سے، اے جويائے اسرار ازل
چشم دل وا ہو تو ہے تقدير عالم بے حجاب
دل ميں يہ سن کر بپا ہنگامہ محشر ہوا
ميں شہيد جستجو تھا، يوں سخن گستر ہوا
اے تري چشم جہاں بيں پر وہ طوفاں آشکار
جن کے ہنگامے ابھي دريا ميں سوتے ہيں خموش
،'کشتي مسکين، و 'جان پاک' و 'ديوار يتيم
علم موسي بھي ہے تيرے سامنے حيرت فروش
چھوڑ کر آبادياں رہتا ہے تو صحرا نورد
زندگي تيري ہے بے روز و شب و فردا دوش
زندگي کا راز کيا ہے، سلطنت کيا چيز ہے
اور يہ سرمايہ و محنت ميں ہے کيسا خروش
ہو رہا ہے ايشيا کا خرقہ ديرينہ چاک
نوجواں اقوام نو دولت کے ہيں پيرايہ پوش
گرچہ اسکندر رہا محروم آب زندگي
فطرت اسکندري اب تک ہے گرم نائونوش
بيچتا ہے ہاشمي ناموس دين مصطفي
خاک و خوں ميں مل رہا ہے ترکمان سخت کوش
آگ ہے، اولاد ابراہيم ہے، نمرود ہے
!کيا کسي کو پھر کسي کا امتحاں مقصود ہے
@ جواب خضر
@ صحرا نوردي
کيوں تعجب ہے مري صحرا نوردي پر تجھے
يہ تگا پوئے دمادم زندگي کي ہے دليل
اے رہين خانہ تو نے وہ سماں ديکھا نہيں
گونجتي ہے جب فضائے دشت ميں بانگ رحيل
ريت کے ٹيلے پہ وہ آہو کا بے پروا خرام
وہ حضر بے برگ و ساماں، وہ سفر بے سنگ و ميل
وہ نمود اختر سيماب پا ہنگام صبح
يا نماياں بام گردوں سے جبين جبرئيل
وہ سکوت شام صحرا ميں غروب آفتاب
جس سے روشن تر ہوئي چشم جہاں بين خليل
اور وہ پاني کے چشمے پر مقام کارواں
اہل ايماں جس طرح جنت ميں گرد سلسبيل
تازہ ويرانے کي سودائے محبت کو تلاش
اور آبادي ميں تو زنجيري کشت و نخيل
پختہ تر ہے گردش پہيم سے جام زندگي
ہے يہي اے بے خبر راز دوام زندگي
@ زندگي
برتر از انديشہء سود و زياں ہے زندگي
ہے کبھي جاں اور کبھي تسليم جاں ہے زندگي
تو اسے پيمانہ امروز و فردا سے نہ ناپ
جاوداں پيہم دواں، ہر دم جواں ہے زندگي
اپني دنيا آپ پيدا کر اگر زندوں ميں ہے
سر آدم ہے، ضمير کن فکاں ہے زندگي
زندگاني کي حقيقت کوہکن کے دل سے پوچھ
جوئے شير و تيشہ و سنگ گراں ہے زندگي
بندگي ميں گھٹ کے رہ جاتي ہے اک جوئے کم آب
اور آزادي ميں بحر بے کراں ہے زندگي
آشکارا ہے يہ اپني قوت تسخير سے
گرچہ اک مٹي کے پيکر ميں نہاں ہے زندگي
قلزم ہستي سے تو ابھرا ہے مانند حباب
اس زياں خانے ميں تيرا امتحاں ہے زندگي
خام ہے جب تک تو ہے مٹي کا اک انبار تو
پختہ ہو جائے تو ہے شمشير بے زنہار تو
ہو صداقت کے ليے جس دل ميں مرنے کي تڑپ
پہلے اپنے پيکر خاکي ميں جاں پيدا کرے
پھونک ڈالے يہ زمين و آسمان مستعار
اور خاکستر سے آپ اپنا جہاں پيدا کرے
زندگي کي قوت پنہاں کو کر دے آشکار
تا يہ چنگاري فروغ جاوداں پيدا کرے
خاک مشرق پر چمک جائے مثال آفتاب
تا بدخشاں پھر وہي لعل گراں پيدا کرے
سوئے گردوں نالہ شب گير کا بھيجے سفير
رات کے تارں ميں اپنے رازداں پيدا کرے
يہ گھڑي محشر کي ہے ، تو عرصہء محشر ميں ہے
پيش کر غافل ، عمل کوئي اگر دفتر ميں ہے

@ سلطنت
'آبتائوں تجھ کو رمز آيہء 'ان الملوک
سلطنت اقوام غالب کي ہے اک جادوگري
خواب سے بيدار ہوتا ہے ذرا محکوم اگر
پھر سلا ديتي ہے اس کو حکمراں کي ساحري
جادوئے محمود کي تاثير سے چشم اياز
ديکھتي ہے حلقہء گردن ميں ساز دلبري
خون اسرائيل آجاتا ہے آخر جوش ميں
توڑ ديتا ہے کوئي موسي طلسم سامري
سروري زيبا فقط اس ذات بے ہمتا کو ہے
حکمراں ہے اک وہي، باقي بتان آزري
از غلامي فطرت آزاد را رسوا مکن
تا تراشي خواجہ ے از برہمن کافر تري
ہے وہي ساز کہن مغرب کا جمہوري نظام
جس کے پردوں ميں نہيں غير از نوائے قيصري
ديو استبداد جمہوري قبا ميں پاے کوب
تو سمجھتا ہے يہ آزادي کي ہے نيلم پري
مجلس آئين و اصلاح و رعايات و حقوق
طب مغرب ميں مزے ميٹھے، اثر خواب آوري
!گرمي گفتار اعضائے مجالس، الاماں
يہ بھي اک سرمايہ داروں کي ہے جنگ زرگري
اس سراب رنگ و بو کو گلستاں سمجھا ہے تو
آہ اے ناداں! قفس کو آشياں سمجھا ہے تو
@ سرمايہ ومحنت
بندئہ مزدور کو جا کر مرا پيغام دے
خضر کا پيغام کيا، ہے يہ پيام کائنات
اے کہ تجھ کو کھا گيا سرمايہ دار حيلہ گر
شاخ آہو پر رہي صديوں تلک تيري برات
دست دولت آفريں کو مزد يوں ملتي رہي
اہل ثروت جيسے ديتے ہيں غريبوں کو زکات
ساحر الموط نے تجھ کو ديا برگ حشيش
اور تو اے بے خبر سمجھا اسے شاخ نبات
نسل، قوميت، کليسا، سلطنت، تہذيب، رنگ
خواجگي نے خوب چن چن کے بنائے مسکرات
کٹ مرا ناداں خيالي ديوتائوں کے ليے
سکرکي لذت ميں تو لٹوا گيا نقد حيات
مکر کي چالوں سے بازي لے گيا سرمايہ دار
انتہائے سادگي سے کھا گيا مزدور مات
اٹھ کہ اب بزم جہاں کا اور ہي اندازہے
مشرق و مغرب ميں تيرے دور کا آغاز ہے
ہمت عالي تو دريا بھي نہيں کرتي قبول
غنچہ ساں غافل ترے دامن ميں شبنم کب تلک
نغمہ بيداري جمہور ہے سامان عيش
قصہ خواب آور اسکندر و جم کب تلک
آفتاب تازہ پيدا بطن گيتي سے ہوا
آسمان! ڈوبے ہوئے تاروں کا ماتم کب تلک
توڑ ڈاليں فطرت انساں نے زنجيريں تمام
دوري جنت سے روتي چشم آدم کب تلک
باغبان چارہ فرما سے يہ کہتي ہے بہار
زخم گل کے واسطے تدبير مرہم کب تلک
کرمک ناداں! طواف شمع سے آزاد ہو
اپني فطرت کے تجلي زار ميں آباد ہو
@ دنيائے اسلام
کيا سناتا ہے مجھے ترک و عرب کي داستاں
مجھ سے کچھ پنہاں نہيں اسلاميوں کا سوز و ساز
لے گئے تثليث کے فرزند ميراث خليل
خشت بنياد کليسا بن گئي خاک حجاز
ہوگئي رسوا زمانے ميں کلاہ لالہ رنگ
جو سراپا ناز تھے، ہيں آج مجبور نياز
لے رہا ہے مے فروشان فرنگستاں سے پارس
وہ مےء سرکش حرارت جس کي ہے مينا گداز
حکمت مغرب سے ملت کي يہ کيفيت ہوئي
ٹکڑے ٹکڑے جس طرح سونے کو کر ديتا ہے گاز
ہوگيا مانند آب ارزاں مسلماں کا لہو
مضطرب ہے تو کہ تيرا دل نہيں دانائے راز
''گفت رومي ''ہر بناے کہنہ کآباداں کنند
''مي نداني ''اول آں بنياد را ويراں کنند
''ملک ہاتھوں سے گيا ملت کي آنکھيں کھل گئيں''
حق ترا چشمے عطا کردست غافل در نگر
موميائي کي گدائي سے تو بہتر ہے شکست
مور بے پر! حاجتے پيش سليمانے مبر
ربط و ضبط ملت بيضا ہے مشرق کي نجات
ايشيا والے ہيں اس نکتے سے اب تک بے خبر
پھر سياست چھوڑ کر داخل حصار ديں ميں ہو
ملک و دولت ہے فقط حفظ حرم کا اک ثمر
ايک ہوں مسلم حرم کي پاسباني کے ليے
نيل کے ساحل سے لے کر تا بخاک کاشغر
جو کرے گا امتياز رنگ و خوں ، مٹ جائے گا
ترک خرگاہي ہو يا اعرابي والا گہر
نسل اگر مسلم کي مذہب پر مقدم ہوگئي
اڑ گيا دنيا سے تو مانند خاک رہ گزر
تا خلافت کي بنا دنيا ميں ہو پھر استور
لا کہيں سے ڈھونڈ کر اسلاف کا قلب و جگر
اے کہ نشناسي خفي را از جلي ہشيار باش
اے گرفتار ابوبکر و علي ہشيار باش
@ شاعر
عشق کو فرياد لازم تھي سو وہ بھي ہو چکي
اب ذرا دل تھام کر فرياد کي تاثير ديکھ
تو نے ديکھا سطوت رفتار دريا کا عروج
موج مضطر کس طرح بنتي ہے اب زنجير ديکھ
عام حريت کا جو ديکھا تھا خواب اسلام نے
اے مسلماں آج تو اس خواب کي تعبير ديکھ
اپني خاکستر سمندر کو ہے سامان وجود
مر کے پھر ہوتا ہے پيدا يہ جہان پير، ديکھ
کھول کر آنکھيں مرے آئينہء گفتار ميں
آنے والے دور کي دھندلي سي اک تصوير ديکھ
آزمودہ فتنہ ہے اک اور بھي گردوں کے پاس
سامنے تقدير کے رسوائي تدبير ديکھ
مسلم استي سينہ را از آرزو آباد دار
ہر زماں پيش نظر، 'لايخلف الميعاد' دار
*
THE TRAVELERS’ GUIDE
*
This long poem is an allegory prepared to convey ‘Allamah Iqbal’s philosophy on several social, economic and political problems facing the world in general and the Muslim world in particular. It is based on an imaginary conversation with S. Khizar A.S. on the model of that described in the Holy Qur’an 18:60-82. The artistic perfection of the poet has made the parallel perfect. S. Musa A.S. was guided through wahy to search for S. Khizar A.S. for obtaining eternal secrets. The Holy Qur’an uses the expression Majma‘ al- Bahrain for the meeting of the two, which may mean confluence of two seas or two rivers. The consensus of opinion among exegesists is that this place was the Gulf of Aqabah. However, ‘Allamah Abu al-A‘la Mawduda has expressed the opinion that the meeting place could have been at the junction of the two tributaries of the River Nile, the “Bahr-al-Abyaz” (The White Nile) and “Bahr-al-Arzaq” (The Blue Nile) in Sudan. Bahr also means a large river which agrees with the word Darya used in this poem. However, irrespective of the meeting place the poem describes the questions posed by ‘Allamah Iqbal in the first part and the answers he received in subsequent parts. These are clear and self contained in the poem. It is also a commentary on World War I and its influence on the Western as well as the Muslim world.
*
One night at the river-bank I was absorbed in contemplation
With a world of restlessness concealed in the heart’s recesses

The night was tranquil, air calm, river gently flowing was
My eye was amazed whether the river or a picture of water it was!

As the suckling baby falls asleep in the cradle
The restless wave had fallen asleep somewhere else!

With the spell of night the birds were confined in nests
The twinkling stars were caught in the moon’s spell!

Suddenly I saw that the globe-trotting Khizar $1
Whose old age contained youth’s color like dawn

Was saying to me “O seeker of the eternal secrets
If the inner eye be open world’s destiny would be unveiled”!

On hearing this an uproaring tumult rose in my heart
Being devoted to seeking the Truth I started talking thus

“O you whose world-encompassing eye sees those storms
Whose tumults are still sleeping quietly in the river

The “indigent’s boat” $2 the chaste soul $3 , the “orphan’s wall” $4
Even the knowledge of Musa before you is in amazement

Leaving habitations you remain wandering in wilderness
No day and night, no yesterday and tomorrow is in your life

What is the secret of life? What is imperialism ?
And what is this struggle between labor and capital ?

The ancient patched garment of Asia is being torn
The youth of parvenu nations are adorned with ornaments $5 !

Though Alexander $6 remained deprived of eternity’s water
The nature of Alexander is busy still in merry-making!

The Holy Prophet’s progeny is selling his dan’s honor
And the struggling Turk is smeared in dust and blood $7 !

There is fire, there is Ibraham’s $8 progeny, there is Namrud $9 !
Does someone desire someone’s test again $10

@ THE RESPONSE OF KHI¿AR

@ Wandering in Deserts

Why are you amazed at my wandering in the deserts ?
This incessant toil is demonstration of life

O the one confined to home, you have not seen that sight
When the call for battle march resounds in the desert air!

That care-free stroll of the deer on the mound of sand
That home without chattel, that journey without distance and destination!

That appearance of the fast-moving star at the dawn $11
Or the forehead of Jibra’al manifest from the sky!

That setting of the sun in the silence of the desert air
By which increased the insight of Khalal’s universe-envisaging eye $12 !

And that halting of the caravan at the stream bank
As the believers’ gathering round the Salsabal $13 !

The ardent Love is in search of an ever new wild land
And in city your effort is in farming and horticulture

The cup of life becomes more mature by revolving
O negligent one, this alone is the secret of life’s permanence!

@ Life

Much above the fear of profit and loss is life!
Now the soul now the surrender of soul is life!

Do not measure it on the scale of today and tomorrow
Eternal, incessantly struggling, ever young is life!

Create your own world if you claim to be among the living
The secret of Adam $14 and the object of “Kun fikan” $15 is life

Ask the mountain digger for the reality of life
The canal of milk, the axe, the heavy rock is life $16

In slavery it is choked to a mere trickling brook
And in freedom like the boundless ocean is life

It is manifested by its power of subduing
Though concealed in a body of dust is life

You have emerged from the existence’ ocean like a bubble
In this losing battle your examination is life

While you are immature only a heap of dust you are
On attaining maturity a merciless sword you are!

The heart which is restless for death in defense of Truth $17
Should first life in his own body must create

Should burn down this borrowed universe
And from the ashes his own universe should create

Should demonstrate the potential power of life
So that this spark may the eternal light create

Should shine like the sun over the lands of the East
So that Badakhshan $18 the same invaluable rubies may again create

Should send heaven-ward the emissary of nightly wailing
And in the night’s stars its confidantes should create

This is the hour of Judgment you in the Judgement’s field are
O negligent one, present actions if some in your treasure are!

@ Imperialism

Come, I shall tell you the secret of the verse “Inn al-muluk” $19
Imperialism is an enchantment of the victorious nations

If the ruled from his stupor slightly wakes up
The ruler’s spell lulls him back to sleep again

From the effect of the spell of Mahmud $20 the eye of Ayaz $21
Sees the accouterments of loveliness round his neck

At last the blood of Isra’al $22 boils up with anger
The spell of Samira $23 is smashed up by some Musa

Sovereignty befits only that Peerless Essence $24
Only He is the sovereign, the rest are Azar’s $25 idols

Do not disgrace your independent disposition with slavery
So that you do not mold yourself into the master who would be a worse infidel than the Brahman

The Western democratic system is the same old orchestra
In whose frets is nothing different from the Qaisar’s $26 tune

The monster of despotism is treading in democracy’s robe
You consider it as the beautiful ferry of independence!

The legislative assembly, the reforms, the rights and concessions
In Western medicine the tastes are sweet, the effect is soporific!

May God protect us from the fervor of speeches of members of assemblies
This also is the capitalists’ sham quarreling to deceive the poor!

You have taken this apparent beauty’s mirage as a garden!
Ah ! O ignorant one! You have taken the cage to be the nest!

@ Capital and Labor

Go and deliver my message to the laboring person
“Not only Khizar’s message, this is the universal message!
O whom the fraudulent capitalist has destroyed
Your destiny has remained a fugitive for centuries

The wealth-creating hand had been paid wages
As the rich pay charity to the poor!

The magician of Alamut $27 gave you the hashash leaves
And you, O negligent one, took it as a tuft of candy!

Race, nation, church, empire, civilization, color
This assortment of intoxicants is made by “imperialism”

The ignorant one gave up his life for mythical gods
You destroyed your life’s capital under intoxicants’ love

The capitalist has won with deceitful stratagems
Due to extreme naivete the laborer is checkmated

Rise, as the world’s assembly has adopted different ways
In the East and the West is the beginning of your age $28


Those with elegant courage do not accept even the ocean
O negligent one, how long would you hold dew in your skirt like the flower bud?

Music of masses’ renaissance is a means of pleasure
The soporific tale of Alexander and Jam how long ? $29

A new sun has arisen from the bowels of the earth
O Sky ! Mourning of stars which have set how long?

Human nature has broken down all the chains
Man’s eye would weep for the lost Paradise how long?

The spring says this to the helping gardener
You would apply ointment to the rose’ wounded heart how long?

O simple fire-fly, be free of revolving round the candle
And be living in the illuminated place of your own nature!

@ The World of Islam


Why are you relating to me the story of Turks and Arabs
Nothing of the grief and joys of Muslims is hidden from me $30

The sons of the Cross have taken away the heritage of Khalal
The soil of Hijaz has become the brick of the church’s foundation! $31

The red cap $32 has become disgraced in the world
Those who were formerly proud are in need of others!

From the wine sellers of Europe Iran is purchasing
That strong wine by whose heat the decanter is melted $33

The politics of the West has reduced the nation such
As gold is rendered to pieces by scissors $34

The blood of the Muslim has become cheap like water
You are restless as your heart is unaware of their fate

Rumi 35 said that every old building that is to be rebuilt
Do you not know that the building is first demolished ?

“The homeland has been lost, the nation has been jolted
O negligent one, look deep as God has granted you insight!

Defeat is better than helplessly begging for màmiya’a $35
O helpless ant ! Do not take your requests to a Sulaiman $36

The salvation of the East is in organization of the Muslim nations
The people of Asia are still unaware of this mystery

Relinquishing “politics” $37 enter the fort of dan again
Country and wealth is only a reward for Haram’s defense

The Muslims should unite into one body for Haram’s defense
From the banks of the Nile to the City of Kashghar $38 !

Whoever would discriminate for color and race would perish
Whether he be the tent-dwelling Turk or the high ranking Arab $39 !

If race would become more important than dan to the Muslim
He would be blown away from the world like the dust of the road!

To establish the Khilafah’s foundations in the world again
The need is to bring from somewhere the ancestors’ mettle

O You who do not distinguish between the tangible and the intangible, beware
O the captive of Abu Bakr and ‘Ala, beware $40 ”

@ Sha‘ir ( The Poet )

Complaint was incumbent on Love and it has been lodged
With a cool heart now watch the effect of the complaint!

You have witnessed the zenith of the majesty of the river’s flow
Now watch how the restless wave becomes a chain in which it gets entangled

The dream of universal freedom which was seen by Islam
O Muslim, you should watch the interpretation of that dream today!

Its own ashes are a means of existence to salamander $41
You should watch the resurrection of this world after death!

With open eyes in the mirror or my discourses
You should watch a faint image of the coming age $42

The sky has one more tested trick preserved in its store
Watch the disgrace of planning in face of destiny’s strength $43

You are a Muslim keep your breast happy with Longing
Every moment keep your eye on “La yukhlif-ul-Ma’ad” $44
*
1. Khizar.

2. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 18:71-73 and 79.

3. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 18:74-76 and 80-81.

4. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 18: 77 and 82

5. Allusion to the conditions after World War I in which the imperialist hold of Western countries over the rest of the world had become stronger and more secure than before the war. In India itself promises of gradual self rule were made during the war. However, on termination of the war and victory of the Allies Britain’s hold over India became tighter as is evidenced by the repressive legislation and suppressive actions of the British Government in the post-war period. In the Muslim countries the conditions were even worse.

6. Sikandar or Alexander.

7. This refers to the behavior of the Arab countries during and after World War I in staging what is known as “Arab Revolt”, and the courageous handling of events by the Turks during and after that War. During the War Arabs sided with the British and undermined the strength of ‘Uthmaniya Khilafah by waging war and sabotage. This is not only a general reference to all Arabs but also a specific reference to King Faisal I who was made the first king of the Hashimite Kingdom of Iraq by the British as a reward for his betrayal of the‘Uthmaniya Khilafah during the War. As he claimed descent from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) he is referred to as the “Hashimite”. ‘Abd al-‘Azaz ibn Sa‘ud (1880-1953), in his desire to rule the whole of Arabian Peninsula, managed to get British help. He used this help not only for establishing his own rule throughout the Arabian peninsula by subduing all the tribes, which could only be done after wholesale bloodshed. He also used it for ousting Sharaf Hussain, Sherif of Makkah Mu‘aïïamah (1908-1924). By this stratagem he succeeded in getting control over what is now known as Saudi Arabia, including the custody of the two biggest shrines of the Islamic world in Makkah Mu‘ïïamah and Madana Munawwarah. This also could only be achieved after much bloodshed and inestimable damage to the glory of the Holy City and the Ka’bah. The Arab revolt was the most painful event of this war. It established complete British control over the heartland of Islam which continues till now. As the British have now ceased to be a superpower the control has passed to the United States. In contrast with all this, under the leadership of Musèafa Kamal Pasha and Enver Pasha, the Turks continued fighting the enemies of Islam, viz. the Greeks and the British who were helping them, even after the official termination of the War. As the Turkish armies were then extremely poor in war material and other requisites this War was very hard on them. This verse alludes to those conditions.

This behavior of the Arabs was a severe heart-ache to ‘Allamah Iqbal and he has not been able to conceal his feelings. He has expressed his disgust in many poems and individual verses, two of which are cited below:

(219) Short-sightedness of Haram’s “holy men” disgraced the Haram
Boundless insight by the Youth of Turkey was displayed!

(220) Time has arrived when I should re-open the tavern of Ruma
The Haram’s holy men in Church’s compound ecstatic I see

8. S. Ibraham A.S.

9. Namrud- Though the Holy Qur’an does not say so according to Muslim traditions Namrud was the king of Ur who ordered the throwing of S. Ibraham A.S into fire.

10. Reference to the world-wide calamities for the Asian and African countries resulting from the victories of the Western countries to which reference has been made in pervious notes. Of special concern to ‘Allamah Iqbal was the plight of the Muslim world to which special reference is made in this verse.

11. This is a message of hope for the Muslim Ummah in the hour of their trial.

12. Reference to the Holy Qur’an 6:75-79. This whole stanza emphasizes the evils of inaction and need for activism by Muslims. It also shows the value of studying the physical world as a means of understanding the Existence and nature of God, as is repeatedly emphasized by the Holy Qur’an. This verse is the climax of this message and shows how the world of stars, moon and sun led S. Ibraham A.S. towards recognizing the Unity, Uniqueness and Superiority of God.

13. Salsabal - This is a spring in the Paradise and the stream ensuing from it.

14. S. Adam A.S.

15. Reference to the Holy Qur’an 6:73 in which God describes the creation of the universe as His Will and Command. As the Holy Qur’an has repeatedly said the creation of the universe is purposeful. That purpose was the eventual creation of Man as the master-piece of His creation and Man’s subsequent perfection into “perfect man” (‘Allamah Iqbal’s Mard-i-Kamil ) in the personality of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.). This is supported by a Hadath to the effect that ‘God would not have created the universe if He had not created me’. God also created the Holy Qur’an for the guidance of Man with which every person can be perfected. Perusal of the poem Malad-i-Adam (The Creation of Adam in his book Payam-i-Mashriq (The Message of the East), and his book Asrar-i-Khuda is recommended for proper understanding of this subject.

16. Heavy rock - Reference to Farhad in the epic of love known as “Sharin O Farhad”. Farhad is known as “mountain digger” because he successfully dug a canal through a mountain and filled it with milk in compliance with a requirement for getting the hand of Sharan, his beloved.

17. This stanza is a description of the pre-requisites to be acquired by a person who is prepared to struggle in the cause of God and Islam.

18. Badakhshan- This is a region in the present day Afghanistan which is famous for rubies and other precious stones.

19. This alludes to The Holy Qur’an 27:34 in which the Queen of Saba (Shaba), on receiving the letter of S. Sulaiman A.S. inviting her to accept Islam, addressed her courtiers thus: “Kings, when they enter a country despoil it, and make the noblest of its people its meanest. Thus do they behave”. This verse is a clear condemnation of imperialism in Islam.

20. Story of Mehmud and Ayaz.

21. Story of Mehmud and Ayaz.

22. The blood of Isra’al- This verse refers to the magic of the sorcerer Samira (Note 23). During the period between the prophethood of S. Musa A.S. and S. ‘Isa A.S. the people of Isra’al were the inheritors of the vice-regency of God and they are treated like “Muslims” in the Holy Qur’an.

23. Samira- This is an allusion to Holy Qur’an 20: 85, 95-97.

24. Peerless Essence Reference to God.

25. Azar’s idols.

26. Qaiser’s tune- Reference to the imperialism of the Roman Empire which is famous for its atrocities.

27. Magician of Alamut- Reference to the Hasan Bin Sabbah (d. 1138 )who was a wizard of his age. He lived in Iran in the eleventh century C.E. He built a fort at Alamut, between Qazwain and Jalan. He furnished it’s interior with the state of the art furnishings and accouterment of comfort and luxury, including the most beautiful girls available. He designated this fort “Paradise”, and laid claims to prophethood. He had a body of followers who enticed unwary people in cities with administration of hemp and transported them to the Alamut Fort when they became intoxicated with hemp. On gaining consciousness they found themselves in strange surroundings which were the ultimate in luxury, including “houra’s”. When they thus became convinced of being in “paradise” they accepted Hasan Bin Sabbah as their prophet. He had built formidable strength which the State could not subdue with mere force. He was a contemporary of Ghias al-Dan Abu al-Fath Qamar Bin Ibraham al-Khayyam, the famous “‘Umar Khayyam”: who was a mathematician, astronomer and poet (ca. 1050-1123). The latter ultimately subdued Hasan Bin Sabbah with better wisdom, based on righteousness instead of wizardry. Later this organization was destroyed by the Mongols about the middle of the 13th century .

28. Allusion to the labor movements all over the world starting at that time. These movements are usually credited to communism and general awakening in the West. However, in reality they owe their origin to the awakening kindled by Islam and Muslim scholars in Spain and Iraq in the middle ages which brought about Reformation and Renaissance in Europe and which is an on-going movement of human liberation from the forces of undue domination. See also the poem titled Masjid-i-Qurèubah (The Cordova’s Mosque) in ‘Allamah Iqbal’s book Bal-i-Jibral (The Gabriel’s Wings).

29. Sikandar O Jam- Reference to the Alexander of Greece and Jamshad of the Persian Empire which were two most powerful empires of the ancient world.

30. This means that the whole history of the Muslim Ummah was known to S. Khizar A.S. It also refers to the history of secession of the Arab world from the fold of the Uthmaniya Khilafah and its aftermath, which has been briefly described in Note 7 above.

31. Reference to the upper hand of Christians in Islamic countries, particularly those with Muslim majorities and Muslim governments.

32. This refers to the Turkish cap which was red in color and had a black frill. It was used as a national cap by Muslims in greater part of the world. It lasted till the beginning of World War II.

33. Reference to the inordinate Western influence in the politics and, still worse, in social life of the people in the Muslim world.

34. Reference to the division of the Muslim world into a large number of secular nation states after World War I. However, our misfortune is that, in spite of the efforts of `Allamah Iqbal and a large number of other reformers all over the Muslim world, the trend towards fragmentation of the Ummah is continuing un-abated.

35. Rumi.

36. Sulaiman.

37. This verse does not teach Muslims to withdraw from politics. It preaches only refraining from God-less Western politics, on the vices of which he is very emphatic. Cf.

(221) I have good insight into this God-less politics
It is Ahriman’s slave-girl, mean, corrupt and dishonest

(222) When it has its greedy eyes on the wealth of others
The advance guard of the army is the church’s priest

38. Kashghar- This is a large and important city in Chinese Turkistan. The second hemstitch of this verse means the entire Islamic world. Though neither the Nile River forms the western boundary nor is Kashghar on the eastern boundary of the Islamic world these names are used as an exigency of poetry.

39. This emphasizes the super-national nature of the Islamic State.

40. This is a stern warning to Muslims to refrain from Shi‘a-Sunni controversies and quarrels which are sapping the strength of the Muslim society and the Muslim world.

41. Salamander- This is a legendary animal which lives and flourishes in fire. This verse is a repetition of `Allamah Iqbal’s message on Islam’s renaissance.

42. This is a message of hope to Muslims. It reminds us of the promise of God that Divine planning and Help will be with us if we are steadfast in our mission. There are many verses in the Holy Qur’an to this effect, e.g. 3:54 and 27:50.

43. Same as last reference

44. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 3:9 which ends in “God never fails in His promise”.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-69.mp3
*

Sahil-E-Darya Pe Main Ek Raat Tha Mehv-E-Nazar
Gosha-E-Dil Mein Chupaye Ek Jahan-E-Iztaraab



Shab Sakoot Afza, Hawa Asoodah, Darya Naram Sair
Thi Nazar Heeran Ke Ye Darya Hai Ya Tasveer-E-Aab



Jaise Gehware Mein So Jata Hai Tifle-E-Sheer Khawaar
Mouj-E-Muztar Thi Kahin Gehraiyon Mein Mast-E-Khawab


Raat Ke Ufsoon Se Tair Ashiyanon Mein Aseer
Anjum-E-Kam Zou Giraftar-E-Tilism-E-Mahtab



Dekhta Kya Hun Ke Woh Paik-E-Jahan Peyma Khizar
Jis Ki Peeri Mein Hai Manind-E-Sahar Rang-E-Shabab


Keh Raha Mujh Se, Ae Joya’ay Asrar-E-Azal !
Chashm-E-Dil Wa Ho To Hai Taqdeer-E-Alam Behijab



Dil Mein Ye Sun Kar Bapa Hangama’ay Mehshar Huwa
Main Shaheed-E-Justujoo Tha, Yun Sukhan-E-Gastar Huwa



Ae Teri Chashme-E-Jahan Been Par Woh Toofan Ashkar
Jin Ke Hangame Abhi Darya Mein Sote Hain Khamosh



‘Kashti-E-Miskeen’-O-‘Jaan-E-Paak’-O-‘Diwar-E-Yateem’
Ilm-E-Musa (A.S.) Bhi Hai Tere Samne Hairat Farosh



Chorh Kar Abadiyan Rehta Hai Tu Sehra Naward
Zindagi Teri Hai Be Roz-O-Shab-O-Farda-O-Dosh



Zindagi Ka Raaz Kya Hai, Saltanat Kya Cheez Hai
Aur Ye Sarmaya-O-Mehnat Mein Hai Kaisa Kharosh


Ho Rahah Hai Asia Ka Kharqa-E-Dairina Chaak
Naujawan Aqwam-E-Nau Doulat Ke Hain Peraya Posh


Garcha Iskandar Raha Mehroom-E-Aab-E-Zindagi
Fitrat-E-Iskandari Ab Tak Hai Garam-E-Nao’ay Nosh


Baichta Hai Hashmi Namoos-E-Deen-E-Mustafa (S.A.W.)
Khak-O-Khoon Mein Mil Raha Hai Turkaman-E-Sakht Kosh



Aag Hai, Aulad-E-Ibraheem (A.S.) Hai, Namrood Hai
Kya Kisi Ko Phir Kisi Ka Imtihaan Maqsood Hai !

@ jawwaab e khizr
@ sehra nuuri

Kyun Taajub Hai Meri Sehra Nawardi Par Tujhe
Ye Taga Pooye Dama Dam Zindagi Ki Hai Daleel



Ae Raheen-E-Khana Tu Ne Woh Saman Dekha Nahin
Goonjti Hai Jab Faza’ay Dasht Mein Bang-E-Raheel

Rait Ke Teele Pe Woh Aaho Ka Be Parwa Kharaam
Woh Hazar Be Barg-O-Saman, Woh Safar Be Sang-O-Meel


Woh Namood-E-Akhtar-E-Simab Pa Hangam-E-Subah
Ya Numayan Baam-E-Gardoon Se Jibeen-E-Jibraeel (A.S.)


Woh Sakoot-E-Sham-E-Sehra Mein Gharoob-E-Aftab
Jis Se Roshan Tar Huwi Chashm-E-Jahan Been-E-Khalil (A.S.)



Aur Woh Pani Ke Chashme Par Maqam-E-Karwan
Ahl-E-Aeeman Jis Tarah Jannat Mein Gird-E-Salsabeel


Taza Weerane Ki Soda’ay Mohabbat Ko Talash
Aur Abadi Mein Tu Zanjeeri Kisht-O-Nakheel



Pukhta Tar Hai Gardish-E-Peham Se Jaam-E-Zindagi
Hai Yehi Ae Be-Khabar Raaz-E-Dawam-E-Zindagi


@ Zindagi



Bartar Az Andesha’ay Sood-O-Ziyan Hai Zindagi
Hai Kabhi Jaan Aur Kabhi Tasleem-E-Jaan Hai Zindagi


Tu Isse Pemana’ay Amroz-O-Farda Se Na Naap
Javidan, Peham Dawan, Har Dam Jawan Hai Zindagi



Apni Dunya Ap Paida Kar Agar Zindon Mein Hai
Sirr-E-Adam Hai, Zameer-E-Kun Fikan Hai Zindagi


Zindagani Ki Haqiqat Kohkan Ke Dil Se Pooch
Jooye Sheer-O-Teesha-O-Sang-E-Garan Hai Zindagi


Bandagi Mein Ghat Ke Reh Jati Hai Ek Jooay Kam Aab
Aur Azadi Mein Beher-E-Bekaran Hai Zindagi

Ashkara Hai Ye Apni Quwwat-E-Taskheer Se
Gharche Ek Mitti Ke Paikar Mein Nihan Hai Zindagi



Qulzam-E-Hasti Se Tu Ubhra Hai Manind-E-Habab
Iss Ziyan Khane Mein Tera Imtihan Hai Zindagi



Kham Hai Jab Tak To Hai Mitti Ka Ek Anbar Tu
Pukhta Ho Jaye To Hai Shamsheer-E-Bezanhar Tu


Ho Sadaqat Ke Liye Jis Dil Mein Marne Ki Tarap
Pehle Apne Paikar-E-Khaki Mein Jaan Paida Kare



Phoonk Dale Ye Zameen-O-Asman-E-Mastaar
Aur Khakstar Se Ap Apna Jahan Paida Kare


Zindagi Ki Quwwat-E-Pinhan Ko Kar De Ashakar
Ta Ye Chingari Furogh-E-Javidan Paida Kare



Khak-E-Mashriq Par Chamak Jaye Misal-E-Aftab
Ta Badkhishan Phir Wohi Laal-E-Giran Paida Kare



Suay Gardoon Nala-E-Shabgeer Ka Bheje Safeer
Raat Ke Taron Mein Apne Raazdan Paida Kare



Ye Ghari Mehshar Ki Hai, Tu Arsa’ay Mehshar Mein Hai
Paish Kar Ghafil, Amal Koi Agar Daftar Mein Hai !



@ Saltanat



Aa Bataon Tujh Ko Ramz-E-Aaya-E-INNAL MULOOK
Saltanat Aqwam-E-Ghalib Ki Hai Ek Jadoogari



Khawab Se Baidar Hota Hai Zara Mehkoom Agar
Phir Sula Deti Hai Uss Ko Hukamran Ki Sahiri



Jadoo-E-Mehmood Ki Taseer Se Chashm-E-Ayaz
Dekhti Hai Halqa-E-Gardan Mein Saaz-E-Dilbari



Khoon-E-Israel Aa Jata Hai Akhir Josh Mein
Torh Deta Hai Koi Musa (A.S.) Tilism-E-Samri



Sarwari Zaiba Faqat Uss Zaat-E-Be Hamta Ko Hai
Hukamran Hai Ek Wohi, Baqi Bootan-E-Azri


Az Ghulami Fitrat-E-Azad Ra Ruswa Makun
Ta Tarashi Khawajah Ae Az Barhaman Kafir Teri


Hai Wohi Saaz-E-Kuhan Maghrib Ka Jamhoori Nazam
Jis Ke Pardon Mein Nahin Ghair Az Nawa’ay Qaisari


Deo Istabdad Jamhoori Qba Mein Paye Koob
Tu Samjhta Hai Ye Azadi Ki Hai Neelam Pari



Majlis-E-Aaeen-O-Islah-O-Ra’ayaat-O-Haqooq
Tib-E-Maghrib Mein Maze Mithe, Asar Khawab Awri


Garmi-E-Ghuftar-E-Aza’ay Majaalis, Al-Aman !
Ye Bhi Ek Sarmaya Daron Ki Hai Jang-E-Zargari


Iss Sarab-E-Rang-O-Bu Ko Gulistan Samjha Hai Tu
Aah Ae Nadad! Qafas Ko Ashiyan Samjha Hai Tu



@ Sarmaya-O-Mehnat



Banda’ay Mazdoor Ko Ja Kar Mera Pegham De
Khizar Ka Pegham Kya, Hai Ye Peyam-E-Kainat


Ae Ke Tujh Ko Kha Gya Sarmayadar-E-Heela Gar
Shakh-E-Aahu Par Rahi Sadiyon Talak Teri Barat



Dast-E-Doulat Afreen Ko Muzd Yun Milti Rahi
Ehl-E-Sarwat Jaise Dete Hain Gharibon Ko Zakat


Sahir-E-Muut Ne Tujh Ko Diya Barg-E-Hasheesh
Aur Tu Ae Bekhabar Samjha Isse Shakh-E-Nabat



Nasal, Qoumiat, Kalisa, Saltanat, Tehzeeb, Rang
Khawajgi Ne Khoob Chun Chun Ke Banaye Muskirat


Kat Mara Nadan Khiyali Deota’on Ke Liye
Sukr Ki Lazzat Mein Tu Lutwa Gya Naqd-E-Hayat



Makr Ki Chalon Se Bazi Le Gya Sarmayadar
Intaha’ay Sadgi Se Kha Gya Mazdoor Maat




Uth Ke Ab Bazm-E-Jahan Ka Aur Hi Andaz Hai
Mashriq-O-Maghrib Mein Tere Dour Ka Aghaz Hai



Himat-E-Aali To Darya Bhi Nahin Karti Qabool
Ghuncha Saan Ghafil Tere Daman Mein Shabnam Kab Talak



Naghma’ay Baidari-E-Jamhoor Hai Saman-E-Aysh
Qissa’ay Khawab Awar-E-Iskandar-O-Jim Kab Talak



Aftab-E-Taza Paida Batan-E-Geeti Se Huwa
Asman! Doobe Huay Taron Ka Matam Kab Talak



Torh Dalain Fitrat-E-Insan Ne Zanjeerain Tamam
Doori Jannat Se Roti Chasm-E-Adam Kab Talak



Baghban-E-Chara Farma Se Ye Kehti Hai Bahar
Zakhm-E-Gul Ke Waste Tadbeer-E-Marham Kab Talak!



Karmak-E-Nadan! Tawaf-E-Shama Se Azad Ho
Apni Fitrat Ke Tajalli Zaar Mein Abad Ho



@ Dunya-e-Islam


Kya Sunata Hai Mujhe Turk-O-Arabki Dastan
Mujh Se Kuch Pinhan Nahin Islamiyon Ka Souz-O-Saaz



Le Gye Taslees Ke Farzand Meeras-E-Khalil (A.S.)
Khisht-E-Bunyad-E-Kalisa Ban Gyi Khak-E-Hijaz


Ho Gyi Ruswa Zamane Mein Kulah-E-Lala Rang
Jo Sarapa Naz The, Hain Aaj Majboor-E-Niaz

Le Raha Hai Mai Faroshaan-E-Farangistan Se Paras
Woh Mai’ay Sarkash Hararat Jis Ki Hai Meena Gudaz



Hikmat-E-Maghrib Se Millat Ki Ye Kaifiyat Huwi
Tukre Tukre Jis Tarah Sone Ko Kar Deta Hai Gaaz



Ho Gya Manind-E-Aab Arzaan Musalman Ka Lahoo
Muztarib Hai Tu Ke Tera Dil Nahin Dana’ay Raaz



Guft Rumi “Har Banaye Kuhna Ka Badaan Kunand”
Mee Nadani “Awal Aan Bunyad Ra Weeran Kunand”



Mulk Haathon Se Gya Millat Ki Aankhain Khul Gayin
Haq Tera Chashme Atta Kar Dast Ghafil Dar Nagar


Moumiyai Ki Gadai Se To Behter Hai Shikast
Moor-e-Be Par! Hajatay Paish-e-Sulimanay Mabar



Rabt-o-Zabt-e-Millat-e-Baiza Hai Mashriq Ki Nijaat
Asia Wale Hain Iss Nukte Se Ab Tak Be-Khabar



Phir Siasat Chorh Kar Dakhil Hisar-e-Deen Mein Ho
Mulk-o-Doulat Hai Faqat Hifz-e-Haram Ka Ek Samar


Aik Hon Muslim Haram Ki Pasbani Ke Liye
Neel Ke Sahil Se Le Kar Ta Bakhak-e-Kashghar



Jo Kare Ga Imtiaz-e-Rang-o-Khoon, Mit Jaye Ga
Turk-e-Khargahi Ho Ya Araabi Wala Guhar


Nasal Agar Muslim Ki Mazhab Par Muqadam Ho Gyi
Urh Gya Dunya Se Tu Manind-E-Khak-E-Reh Guzar


Ta Khilafat Ki Bina Dunya Mein Ho Phir Ustawar
La Kahin Se Dhoond Kar Aslaaf Ka Qalb-O-Jigar



Ae Ke Nashna See Khafi Ra Az Jali Hushyar Bash
Ae Giraftar-E-Abubakr (R.A.)-O-Ali (R.A.) Hushyar Bash

@ shaer

Ishq Ko Faryad Lazim Thi So Woh Bhi Ho Chuki
Ab Zara Dil Thaam Kar Faryad Ki Taseer Dekh


Tu Ne Dekha Satwat-E-Raftar-E-Darya Ka Urooj
Mouj-E-Muztar Kis Tarah Banti Hai Ab Zanjeer Dekh



Aam Huriyat Ka Jo Dekha Tha Khawab Islam Ne
Ae Musalman Aaj Tu Uss Khawab Ki Tabeer Dekh



Apni Khakstar Samundar Ko Hai Saman-E-Wujood
Mar Ke Phir Hota Hai Ye Jahan-E-Peer, Dekh



Khol Kar Ankhain Mere Ayna-E-Guftar Mein
Ane Wale Dour Ki Dhundli Si Ek Tasveer Dekh


Azmudah Fitna Hai Ek Aur Bhi Gardoon Ke Pas
Samne Taqdeer Ke Ruswayi-E-Tadbeer Dekh


Muslim Asti Seena Ra Az Arzoo Abad Dar
Har Zaman Paish-E-Nazar ‘La Yukhalif Ul Meead’ Dar
*
