مرزا غالب
*
فکر انساں پر تري ہستي سے يہ روشن ہوا
ہے پر مرغ تخيل کي رسائي تا کجا
تھا سراپا روح تو ، بزم سخن پيکر ترا
زيب محفل بھي رہا محفل سے پنہاں بھي رہا
ديد تيري آنکھ کو اس حسن کي منظور ہے
بن کے سوز زندگي ہر شے ميں جو مستور ہے
محفل ہستي تري بربط سے ہے سرمايہ دار
جس طرح ندي کے نغموں سے سکوت کوہسار
تيرے فردوس تخيل سے ہے قدرت کي بہار
تيري کشت فکر سے اگتے ہيں عالم سبزہ وار
زندگي مضمر ہے تيري شوخي تحرير ميں
تاب گويائي سے جنبش ہے لب تصوير ميں
نطق کو سو ناز ہيں تيرے لب اعجاز پر
محو حيرت ہے ثريا رفعت پرواز پر
شاہد مضموں تصدق ہے ترے انداز پر
خندہ زن ہے غنچہ دلي گل شيراز پر
آہ! تو اجڑي ہوئي دلي ميں آراميدہ ہے
گلشن ويمر ميں تيرا ہم نوا خوابيدہ ہے
لطف گويائي ميں تيري ہمسري ممکن نہيں
ہو تخيل کا نہ جب تک فکر کامل ہم نشيں
ہائے! اب کيا ہو گئي ہندوستاں کي سر زميں
آہ! اے نظارہ آموز نگاہ نکتہ بيں
گيسوئے اردو ابھي منت پذير شانہ ہے
شمع يہ سودائي دل سوزي پروانہ ہے
اے جہان آباد ، اے گہوارہ علم و ہنر
ہيں سراپا نالہ خاموش تيرے بام و در
ذرے ذرے ميں ترے خوابيدہ ہيں شمں و قمر
يوں تو پوشيدہ ہيں تيري خاک ميں لاکھوں گہر
دفن تجھ ميں کوئي فخر روزگار ايسا بھي ہے؟
تجھ ميں پنہاں کوئي موتي آبدار ايسا بھي ہے؟
*
Mirza Ghalib
*
This elegy is a tribute to the genius of Mirza Asad Allah Khan Ghalib. The poem also provides a glimpse of ‘Allamah Iqbal’s feelings of love for Delhi as an emblem of the glory of the Muslim civilization in the Indian sub-continent, which reached its zenith during the reign of Shahjahan (1592-1666, reigned 1627-58), the famous Mughal Emperor of India and the builder of the Taj Mahal. The love and pride of ‘Allamah Iqbal for the period of the glory of Muslims and Islam during the rise of the Islamic civilization, and his pathos at the decay of this civilization appear throughout his works, including Bang-i-Dara.
*
Through you the secret was revealed to the human intellect
That innumerable enigmas are solved by human intellect

You were the complete soul, literary assembly was your body
You adorned as well as remained veiled from the assembly $1

Your eye is longing to witness that veiled Beauty
Which is veiled in everything as the pathos of life $2

The assemblage of existence is rich with your harp
As mountain's silence by the brook's melodious harp

The garden of your imagination bestows glory on the universe
From the field of your thought worlds grow like meadows

Life is concealed in the humor of your verse
Picture's lips move with your command of language

Speech is very proud of the elegance of your miraculous lips
Thurayyah is astonished at your style's elegance

Beloved of literature itself loves your style
Delhi's bud is mocking at the rose of Shiraz $3

Ah! You are resting in the midst of Delhi’s ruins
Your counterpart is resting in the Weimar's $4 garden


Matching you in literary elegance is not possible
Till maturity of thought and imagination are combined

Ah! What has befallen the land of India!
Ah! The inspirer of the super-critical eye!

The lock of Urdu's hair still craves for combing
This candle still craves for moth's heart-felt pathos

O Jahanabad $5 ! O cradle of learning and art
Your entire super-structure is a silent lament

The sun and the moon are asleep in every speck of your dust
Though innumerable other gems are also hidden in your dust $6

Does another world-famous person like him also lie buried in you?
Does another gem like him also lie concealed in you?
*
1. This is an allusion to the lack of recognition of Ghalib's genius at the court of Bahadur Shah, the last Mughal Emperor of India. It also means that, though you adorned the literary assemblies and were bodily visible, your real self could not be seen except by those with insight.
2. This refers to the Sufi concept of Wahdat al-Wujud according to which everything in the universe is God in different forms. Allamah Iqbal believed in the former concept earlier in his life and changed over to the latter later on.
3. This is an allusion to Muhammad Shams al-Dan Hafiz (d. 1389), who was an eminent Persian poet of Iran and lived in Sharaz. He specialized in ghazal, which is also Ghalib's specialty.
4. This alludes to the famous German poet Goethe who is buried in Weimar, Germany.
5. This is an abbreviation for Shahjahanabad, which is the original name of Delhi after its construction under the Mughal Emperor Shahjahan, who reconstructed it and added the famous Red Fort and the Jami`a Masjid together with the whole of what is the Old Delhi now.
6. This alludes to the antiquity of Delhi, which goes back to several millennia. During the major part of this long period it was the capital of some kingdom of the Indian sub-continent. As such it was always the abode of the elite of the age.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-04.mp3
*
Fikar-e- Insan Per Teri Hasti Se Ye Roshan Huwa
Hai Per-e-Muragh-e-Takhayul Ki Rasayi Ta Kuja

Tha Sarapa Rooh Tu, Bazm-e- Sukhan Pekar Tera
Zaib-E-Mehfil Bhi Raha, Mehfil Se Pinhan Bhi Raha

Deed Teri Aankh Ko Uss Husn Ki Manzoor Hai
Ban Ke Souz e-Zindagi Her Shay Mein Jo Mastoor Hai

Mehfil-e-Hasti Teri Barbat Se Hai Sarmayadar
Jis Tarah Naddi Ke Naghmon Se Sakoot-E-Kohsar

Tere Ferdous-e-Takhayul Se Hai Qudrat Ki Bahar
Teri Kisht-e-Fikar Se Ugte Hain Aalam Sabza War

Zindagi Muzmer Hai Teri Shaukhi-e-Tehreer Mein
Tab-E-Goyai Se Junbish Hai Lab-e-Tasveer Mein

Nutaq Ko So Naz Hain Tere Lab-e-Ejaz Per
Mehv-e-Hairat Hai Surayya Rifat-e- Parwaz Per

Shahid-e-Mazmoon Tassaduq Hai Tere Andaz Per
Khandazan Hai Guncha-e-Dilli Gul-e-Shiraz Per

Aah! Tu Ujhari Huwi Dilli Mein Aaramida Hai
Gulshan-e-Weimar* Mein Tera Humnawa Khawabida Hai

Lutaf-e-Goyai Mein Teri Humsari Mumkin Nahin
Ho Takhayyul Ka Na Jab Tak Fikar-e-Kamil Hum Nasheen

Haye! Ab Kya Ho Gyi Hindustan Ki Ser Zameen
Ah! Ae Nazara Aamoz-e-Nigah-e-Nukta Been

Gaisuay Urdu Abhi Mannat Pazeer-e-Shana Hai
Shama Ye Sodai-e-Dilsozi-e-Perwana Hai

Ae Jahan Abad! Ae Gehwara-e-Ilam-o-Hunar
Hain Sarapa Nala-e-Khamosh Tere Baam-o-Der

Zarre Zarre Mein Tere Khabidah Hein Shamas-o-Qamar
Yun To Poshida Hain Teri Khak Mein Lakhon Gohar

Dafan Tujh Mein Koi Fakhar-e-Rozgar Aesa Bhi Hai?
Tujh Mein Pinhan Koi Moti Aab Dar Aesa Bhi Hai?
*
