نہ آتے ، ہميں اس ميں تکرار کيا تھي
*
نہ آتے ، ہميں اس ميں تکرار کيا تھي
مگر وعدہ کرتے ہوئے عار کيا تھي
تمھارے پيامي نے سب راز کھولا
خطا اس ميں بندے کي سرکار کيا تھي
بھري بزم ميں اپنے عاشق کو تاڑا
!تري آنکھ مستي ميں ہشيار کيا تھي
تامل تو تھا ان کو آنے ميں قاصد
مگر يہ بتا طرز انکار کيا تھي
کھنچے خود بخود جانب طور موسي
!کشش تيري اے شوق ديدار کيا تھي
کہيں ذکر رہتا ہے اقبال تيرا
فسوں تھا کوئي ، تيري گفتار کيا تھي
*
IF YOU HAD NOT COME I WOULD HAVE HAD NO OCCASION FOR CONTENTION
*
This ghazal is the only one in Bang-i-Dara in the style of Dagh. It is believed that he had written several other ghazals in the same style but excluded them from this book at the time of its compilation. However, such ghazals were very few and the above piece of information may be only somebody's conjecture. ‘Allamah Iqbal was a philosopher and an Islamist more than a poet. The style of ghazal, particularly the classical ghazal, is very much restricted by the constraints of rhyming and the length of the poem. It is not suitable for conveying the extensive and deep thoughts which he wanted to convey. Hence there are very few ghazals in the classical style of Dagh. This ghazal is typically mystic and describes the attributes of the Love of God in the language of materialistic love.
*
If you had not come I would have had no occasion for contention
But what reluctance in making the promise was?

Your messenger disclosed every secret
O Lord! What fault of Man in this was? $1

You recognized Your Lover in the full assembly
How alert Your eye in the middle of the ecstasy was!

True! Reluctant he was to come, O messenger
But tell me what the manner of denial was

Musa was effortlessly attracted to Tur
How strong, O Zeal your attraction was ! $2

Your fame continues somewhere, O Iqbal!
Some magic, not your speech it was
*
1. Allusion to the Holy Qur'an as a source of all knowledge and guidance for which there are many references in the Holy Book itself, such as 4:82; 6:92; 10:1; 27:6; 31:2; 36:2 and 45:2.

2. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 27:7-14 and 28:29-35.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-50-2.MP3
*
Na Ate, Humain Iss Mein Takrar Ka Thi
Magar Wada Karte Huwe Aar Kya Thi


Tumhare Payami Ne Sub Raaz Khola
Khata Iss Mein Bande Ki Sarkar Kya Thi


Bhari Bazm Mein Apne Ashiq Ko Tara
Teri Ankh Masti Mein Hushyar Kya Thi!

Tammal To Tha Un Ko Ane Mein Qasid
Magar Ye Bata Tarz-e-Inkar Kya Thi

Khinche Khud-Ba-Khud Janib-e-Toor Musa (A.S.)
Kashish Teri Ae Shauq-e-Didar Kya Thi !


Kahin Zikr Rehta Hai Iqbal Tera
Fasoon Tha Koi, Teri Guftar Kya Thi
*
