عبد القادر کے نام
*
اٹھ کہ ظلمت ہوئي پيدا افق خاور پر
بزم ميں شعلہ نوائي سے اجالا کر ديں
ايک فرياد ہے مانند سپند اپني بساط
اسي ہنگامے سے محفل تہ و بالا کر ديں
اہل محفل کو دکھا ديں اثر صيقل عشق
سنگ امروز کو آئينہ فردا کر ديں
جلوہ يوسف گم گشتہ دکھا کر ان کو
تپش آمادہ تر از خون زليخا کر ديں
اس چمن کو سبق آئين نمو کا دے کر
قطرہ شبنم بے مايہ کو دريا کر ديں
رخت جاں بت کدہء چيں سے اٹھا ليں اپنا
سب کو محو رخ سعدي و سليمي کر ديں
ديکھ! يثرب ميں ہوا ناقہ ليلي بيکار
قيس کو آرزوئے نو سے شناسا کر ديں
بادہ ديرينہ ہو اور گرم ہو ايسا کہ گداز
جگر شيشہ و پيمانہ و مينا کر ديں
گرم رکھتا تھا ہميں سردي مغرب ميں جو داغ
چير کر سينہ اسے وقف تماشا کر ديں
شمع کي طرح جييں بزم گہ عالم ميں
خود جليں ، ديدہ اغيار کو بينا کر ديں
ہر چہ در دل گذرد وقف زباں دارد شمع ''
''سوختن نيست خيالے کہ نہاں دارد شمع
*
ADDRESSED TO ABD AL-QADIR
*
This and the next poem are complementary to each other and contain a flood of his longings and ambitions for service to Islam and Muslims. He got the motivation for this poem from the good organization of the society and government of European countries and focusing of their attention to the work of national reconstruction and advancement. At that time he could not do better than express his feelings to his long term friend and confidante, Sir ‘Abd al‑Qadir, Barrister at Law, Lahore who was also the editor of the famous Urdu magazine, Makhzan . At that time he only expressed his thoughts as they occurred to him. He made this task the ambition and purpose of his life and produced a vast amount of literature in Urdu, Persian and English on this subject, mostly in verse. Some of this work has already appeared in this commentary and much more will appear as we proceed with the study of "Bang-i-Dara ".
*
Rise, as darkness has appeared on the eastern horizon
We should light up the assemblage with blazing songs

Our capacity is only a cry of lament like the wild rue $1
We should overturn the assemblage with this same uproar

We should show the assemblage the effect of Love’s polish
We should convert the stone of today into the mirror of tomorrow $2

By showing them the effulgence of the lost Yusuf $3
We should make them more agitation-prone than Zalaykha’s blood $4

By giving the lesson of the law of growth to this garden
We should turn the insignificant drop of dew into the ocean

We should lift our dearest chattel from the China' s temple $5
We should fascinate all with the face of Sa'di $6 and Sulaima $7

Look! The Lailah' s she camel became useless in Yathrib
We should make Qais acquainted with the new Longing $8

The wine should be mature and so hot that with it
We should soften the heart of the glass, the goblet, and the decanter

The grief which kept us warm in the cold of the West
Opening up the breast we should make it public

In the world's congregation we should live like the candle
We should burn ourselves and open up the rivals' eyes

"The candle reveals whatever passes through the heart
Burning is not the thought which the candle conceals"
*
1. Sipand or Wild Rue‑ The property of the rue seed of cracking and jumping when put in fire is referred to here as an expression of distress and lament as well as the restlessness produced by them.

2. This refers to the technology of glass making, ultimately making mirrors, whose starting material is a base material like silicates in stones and soil. This hemistich means that we should convert the youth of today, who are inert and useless like stones, into the mirrors of tomorrow.

3. This verse alludes to the early part of the story of S. Yusuf A.S. for which see the Holy Qur'an Surah 12, especially the first 20 verses.

4. Zalikhah or Zulaykhah.

5. This is a part of the often repeated message of ‘Allamah Iqbal that Muslims should return to Islam for guidance in knowledge and for inspiration for noble deeds. The mention of China is a delicate reference to the Hadath that one should acquire knowledge even if it is in China.

6. Sa`da.

7. Sulaima- It was a tradition in pre‑Islamic Arabic poetry to write poems about their beloveds. However, the identity of the beloved was not revealed and she was represented by one of the several legendary beauties of the Arab folk‑lore, such as Salmah, Sulaima, Lubnah, Lailah etc. This poetic tradition was continued and strengthened by the Muslim poets, particularly the sufa ones. However, the difference was that God and/or the Holy Prophet S.A.W. was the focus of their Love instead of the human beauties. The tradition of using the names of the legendary beauties came into Persian and Urdu poetry also. `Allamah Iqbal has adopted the name of Salaima in his poetry, as here, in the sense of converging full attention on Islam and Islamic values.

8. With the advent of Islam old values in literature, including poetry, changed as has been stated earlier [See Introduction to Poem 15. "`Aql-o-Dil" (The Intellect and Heart)]. Instead of Lailah and her she‑camel, God and Holy Prophet S.A.W. became the objects of Love and they were referred to metaphorically as Lailah. `Allamah Iqbal has used this metaphor often. Cf.

(184) Bu `Ala in Lailah's camel's dust‑cloud is lost
Ruma's hand the curtain of her litter has got
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-23.mp3
*
Uth Ke Zulmat Huwi Paida Ufaq-e-Khawar Par
Bazm Mein Shoala Nawayi Se Ujala Kar Dain



Aik Faryad Hai Manind-e-Sipand Apni Bisat
Issi Hangame Se Mehfil Tah-o-Bala Kar Dain



Ahl-e-Mehfil Ko Dikha Dain Asr-e-Saqeel-e-Ishq
Sang-e-Amroz Ko Aeena-e-Farda Kar Dain



Jalwa-e-Yousaf-e-Gum Gashta Dikha Kar In Ko
Tapish Aamadah Tar Az Khoon-e-Zulekha Kar Dain



Iss Chaman Ko Sabaq Aaeene-e-Namoo Ka Dar Kar
Qatra-e-Shabnam-e-Be-Maya Ko Darya Kar Dain



Rakht-e-Jaan Butkuda-e-Cheen De Utha Lain Apna
Sub Ko Mehv-e-Rukh-e-Saadi-o-Sulema Kar Dain



Dekh! Yasrab Mein Huwa Naqa-e-Laila Baikar
Qias Ko Arzoo-e-Nau Se Shanasa Kar Dain



Badah Dairina Ho Aur Garam Ho Aesa Ke Gudaz
Jigar-e-Shisha-o-Pemana-o-Meena Kar Dain



Garam Rakhta Tha Humain Sardi-e-Maghrib Mein Jo Dagh
Cheer Kar Seena Usse Waqf-e-Tamasha Kar Dain



Shama Ki Tarah Jabeen Bazm Gah-e-Alam Mein
Khud Jalain, Didah-e-Aghyar Ko Beena Kar Dain



“Har Che Dil Guzrd Wa Qaf-e-Zuban Darad Shama
Sokhtan Neest Khaya Le Ke Nihan Darad Shama”
*
