حکمت فرعونی
*
حکمت ارباب دین کردم عیان
حکمت ارباب کین را ہم بدان
حکمت ارباب کین مکر است و فن
مکر و فن تخریب جان ، تعمیر تن
حکمتی از بند دین آزادہ ئی
از مقام شوق دور افتادہ ئی
مکتب از تدبیر او گیرد نظام
تا بکام خواجہ اندیشد غلام
شیخ ملت با حدیث دلنشین
بر مراد او کند تجدید دین
از دم او وحدت قومی دو نیم
کس حریفش نیست جز چوب کلیم
وای قومی کشتۂ تدبیر غیر
کار او تخریب خود تعمیر غیر
می شود در علم و فن صاحب نظر
از وجود خود نگردد با خبر
نقش حق را از نگین خود سترد
در ضمیرش آرزوہا زاد و مرد
بی نصیب آمد ز اولاد غیور
جان بتن چون مردہ ئی در خاک گور
از حیا بیگانہ پیران کہن
نوجوانان چون زنان مشغول تن 
در دل شان آرزوہا بی ثبات
مردہ زایند از بطون امہات
دختران او بزلف خود اسیر
شوخ چشم و خود نما و خردہ گیر
ساختہ پرداختہ دل باختہ
ابروان مثل دو تیغ آختہ
ساعد سیمین شان عیش نظر
سینۂ ماہی بموج اندر نگر
ملتی خاکستر او بی شرر
صبح او از شام او تاریکتر
ہر زمان اندر تلاش ساز و برگ
کار او فکر معاش و ترس مرگ
منعمان او بخیل و عیش دوست
غافل از مغزاند و اندر بند پوست
قوت فرمانروا معبود او
در زیان دین و ایمان سود او
از حد امروز خود بیرون نجست
روزگارش نقش یک فردا نبست
از نیاکان دفتری اندر بغل
الامان از گفتہ ہای بے عمل
دین او عہد وفا بستن بغیر
یعنی از خشت حرم تعمیر دیر
آہ قومی دل ز حق پرداختہ
مرد و مرگ خویش را نشناختہ
*
THE WISDOM OF THE PHAROAHS
*

*
I have unfolded the wisdom of the people of faith,
now learn the wisdom of the people of malice.
The wisdom of the people of malice is deceit and artifice;
deceit and artifice: they destroy the soul and build the body.
This is wisdom that has freed itself from faith's bonds
and has strayed far away from the station of Love.
The school gets the system through it's thinking
so that the servant learns to think in line with the master's desires.
The religious scholar of the nation, in a charming way,
reinterprets religion to his (Pharaoh's) liking.
The unity of the people is broken because of him;
nothing can compete with him except Moses' Staff.
Woe to a people that get prey to others' stratagies,
their task is to destroy themselves and build up others.
They gain knowledge of science and art,
but remain unaware of their own self-identity.
They erase the God's sign from their ringstone,
aspirations arise in their heart only to die away.
They are not blessed with a progeny having a sense of honour, 
their children have souls in their bodies like corpses in graves.
Their old people lack modesty,
the youth are busy decorating themselves like women.
The desires that spring from their hearts are unstable,
they are born dead from the wombs of their mothers.
Their daughters are caught in the snares of their curling locks,
bold-eyed, fond of display and carping;
well-dressed, with exquisite make-up, coquettish;
their eyebrows like two unsheathed swords;
their white silvery forearms pleasing to the eyes;
their bosoms showing like fish in water.
A nation whose ashes are devoid of any live spark,
whose morning is darker than its eve.
It is always in search of material goods,
its only preoccupation is anxiety for livelihood and fear of death.
Its rich are miserly, pleasure-loving,
intent upon seeking the shell, and neglectful of the kernel.
The might of its ruler is the object of its adoration,
in loss of faith and belief lies its gain.
It never looks beyond its today
and never creates a tomorrow for itself.
It has the annals of its ancestors under its arms,
alas! it only discourses on them without acting on them.
Its creed is to offer loyalty to others,
to build temples with the material of the mosque.
Alas! for a nation which has cut itself adrift from God, 
which is dead, but doesn't understand its death.
*

*

*

*