’’در شرح اسرار اسمای علی مرتضی‘‘
*
مسلم اول شہ مردان علے
عشق را سرمایہ ی ایمان علے
از ولای دودمانش زندہ ام
در جہان مثل گہر تابندہ ام
نرگسم وارفتہ ی نظارہ ام
در خیابانش چو بو آوارہ ام
زمزم ار جوشد ز خاک من ازوست
می اگر ریزد ز تاک من ازوست
خاکم و از مہر او آئینہ ام
می توان دیدن نوا در سینہ ام
از رخ او فال پیغمبر گرفت
ملت حق از شکوہش فر گرفت
قوت دین مبین فرمودہ اش
کائنات آئین پذیر از دودہ اش
مرسل حق کرد نامش بوتراب
حق ’’یداللہ‘‘ خواند در ام الکتاب
ہر کہ دانای رموز زندگیست
سر اسمای علی داند کہ چیست
خاک تاریکی کہ نام او تن است
عقل از بیداد او در شیون است
فکر گردون رس زمین پیما ازو
چشم کور و گوش ناشنوا ازو
از ہوس تیغ دو رو دارد بدست
رہروان را دل برین رہزن شکست
شیر حق این خاک را تسخیر کرد
این گل تاریک را اکسیر کرد
مرتضی کز تیغ او حق روشن است
بوتراب از فتح اقلیم تن است
مرد کشور گیر از کراری است
گوہرش را آبرو خودداری است
ہر کہ در آفاق گردد بوتراب
باز گرداند ز مغرب آفتاب
ہر کہ زین بر مرکب تن تنگ بست
چون نگین بر خاتم دولت نشست
زیر پاش اینجا شکوہ خیبر است
دست او آنجا قسیم کوثر است
از خود آگاہے یداللہی کند
از یداللہی شہنشاہی کند
ذات او دروازہ ی شہر علوم
زیر فرمانش حجاز و چین و روم
حکمران باید شدن بر خاک خویش
تا می روشن خوری از تاک خویش
خاک گشتن مذہب پروانگیست
خاک را اب شو کہ این مردانگیست
سنگ شو ای ہمچو گل نازک بدن
تا شوے بنیاد دیوار چمن
از گل خود آدمی تعمیر کن
آدمی را عالمی تعمیر کن
گر بنا سازی نہ دیوار و دری
خشت از خاک تو بندد دیگری
ای ز جور چرخ ناہنجار تنگ
جام تو فریادی بیداد سنگ
نالہ و فریاد و ماتم تا کجا؟
سینہ کوبیہای پیہم تا کجا؟
در عمل پوشیدہ مضمون حیات
لذت تخلیق قانون حیات
خیز و خلاق جہان تازہ شو
شعلہ در بر کن خلیل آوازہ شو
با جہان نامساعد ساختن
ہست در میدان سپر انداختن
مرد خودداری کہ باشد پختہ کار
با مزاج او بسازد روزگار
گر نسازد با مزاج او جہان
می شود جنگ آزما با آسمان
بر کند بنیاد موجودات را
می دہد ترکیب نو ذرات را
گردش ایام را برھم زند
چرخ نیلی فام را برہم زند
می کند از قوت خود آشکار
روزگار نو کہ باشد سازگار
در جہان نتوان اگر مردانہ زیست
ہمچو مردان جانسپردن زندگیست
آزماید صاحب قلب سلیم
زور خود را از مہمات عظیم
عشق با دشوار ورزیدن خوشست
چون خلیل از شعلہ گلچیدن خوشست
ممکنات قوت مردان کار
گردد از مشکل پسندی آشکار
حربہ ی دون ہمتان کین است و بس
زندگی را این یک آئین است و بس
زندگانے قوت پیداستی
اصل او از ذوق استیلاستی
عفو بیجا سردی خون حیات
سکتہ ئی در بیت موزون حیات
ہر کہ در قعر مذلت ماندہ است
ناتوانی را قناعت خواندہ است
ناتوانے زندگی را رہزن است
بطنش از خوف و دروغ آبستن است
از مکارم اندرون او تہی است
شیرش از بہر ذمائم فربہی است
ہوشیار ای صاحب عقل سلیم
در کمینہا می نشیند این غنیم
گر خردمندی فریب او مخود
مثل حر با ہر زمان رنگش دگر
شکل او اھل نظر نشناختند
پردہ ہا بر روی او انداختند
گاہ او را رحم و نرمی پردہ دار
گاہ می پوشد ردای انکسار
گاہ او مستور در مجبوری است
گاہ پنہان در تہ معذوری است
چہرہ در شکل تن آسانی نمود
دل ز دست صاحب قوت ربود
با توانائی صداقت توأم است
گر خود آگاہی ہمین جام جم است
زندگی کشت است و حاصل قوتست
شرح رمز حق و باطل قوتست
مدعی گر مایہ دار از قوت است
دعوی او بی نیاز از حجت است
باطل از قوت پذیرد شان حق
خویش را حق داند از بطلان حق
از کن او زھر کوثر می شود
خیر را گوید شری ، شر می شود
ای ز آداب امانت بیخبر
از دو عالم خویش را بہتر شمر
از رموز زندگے آگاہ شو
ظالم و جاہل ز غیر اللہ شو
چشم و گوش و لب گشا ای ہوشمند
گر نبینی راہ حق بر من بخند
 

*
SETTING FORTH THE INNER MEANING OF THE NAMES OF ALI
*

*
ALI is the first Muslim and the King of men,
In Love's eyes Ali is the treasure of the Faith.
Devotion to his family inspires me with life
So that I am as a shining pearl.
Like the narcissus, I am entraptured with gazing:
Like perfume, I am straying though his pleasure garden.
If holy water gushes from my earth, he is the source;
If wine pours from my grapes, he is the cause.
I am dust, but his sun hath made me as a mirror:
Song can be seen in my breast.
From Ali's face the Prophet drew many a fair omen,
By his majesty the true religion is glorified
His commandments are the strength of Islam:
All things pay allegiance to his House.
The Apostle of God gave him the name Bu Turab;
God in the Koran called him "the Hand of Allah."
Every one that is acquainted with Life's mysteries
Knows what is the inner meaning of the names of Ali.
The dark clay, whose name is the body
Our reason is ever be moaning its iniquity.
On avvount of it our sky-reaching thought plods over the earth;
It makes our eyes blind and our cars deaf.
It hath in its hand a two-edge sword of lust:
Travelers' hearts are broken by this brigand.
Ali, the Lion of God, subdued the body's clay
And transmuted this dark earth to gold.
Murtaza, by whose sword the splendour of Truth was revealed,
Is named Bu Turab from his conquest of the body. $1
Man wins territory by prowess in battle,
But his brightest jewel is masters of himself.
Whosoever in the world become a Bu Turab
Turns back the sun from the west; $2
Whosoever saddles tightly the seed of the body
Sits like the bezel on the seal of sovereignty:
Here the might of Khaibar is under his feet, $3
And hereafter his hand will distribute the water of Kauthar. $4
Through self-knowledge, he acts as God's Hand,
And in virtue of being God's Hand he reigns over all.
His person is the gate of the city of the sciences. $5
Arabia, China, and Greece are subject to him.
If thou wouldst drink clear wine from thine own grapes.
Thou must needs wield authority over thine own earth.
To become earth is the creed of a moth:
Be a conqueror of earth; that alone is worthy of a man.
Thou art soft as a rose. Become hard as a stone,
That thou mayst be the foundation of the wall of the garden!
Build thy clay into a Man,
Build thy Man into a World
Unless from thine own earth thou build - thine own wall or door.
Someone else will make bricks of thine earth.
O thou who complaints of the cruelty of Heaven,
Thou whose glass cries out against the injustice of the stone,
How long this wailing and crying and lamentation ?
How long this perpetual beating of thy breast ?
The pith of Life is contained in action,
The delight in creation is the law of Life.
Arise and create a new world!
Wrap thyself in flames, be an Abraham!
To comply with this world which does not favour thy purposes
Is to fling away thy buckler on the field of battle.
The man of strong character who is master of himself
Will find Fortune complaisant.
If the world does not comply with his humour,
He will try the hazard of war with Heaven:
He will dig up the foundations of the universe
And cast its atoms into a new mould.
He will subvert the course of Time
And wreck the azure firmament.
By his own strength he will produce
A new world which will do his pleasure.
If one cannot live in the world as be seems a man,
Then it is better to die like the brave.
He that hath a sound heart
Will prove his strength by great enterprises.
' Tis sweet to use love in hard tasks
And, like Abraham, to gather roses from flames $6
The potentialities of men of action
Are displayed in willing acceptance of what is difficult.
Mean spirits have no weapon but resentment,
Life has only one law.
Life is power made manifest,
And its mainspring is the desire for victory.
Mercy out of season is a chilling of Life's blood,
A break in the rhythm of Life's music.
Whoever is sunk in the depths of ignomity
Calls his weakness contentment.
Weakness is the plunderer of Life,
Its womb is teeming with fears and lies.
Its soul is empty of virtues,
Vices fatten on its milk.
O man of sound judgment, beware!
This spoiler is lurking in ambush
Be not its dupe, if thou art wise:
Chameleon-like, it changes colour every moment.
Even by keen observers its form is not discerned
Veils are thrown over its face.
Now it is muffled in pity and gentleness,
Now it wears the cloak of humanity.
Some times it is disguised as compulsion,
Sometimes as excusability.
It appears in the shape of self-indulgence
And robs the strong man's heart of courage.
Strength is the twin of Truth;
If thou knowest thyself, strength is the Truth-revealing glass.
Life is the seed, and power the crop:
Power explains the mystery of truth and falsehood.
A claimant, if he be possessed of power,
Needs no argument for his claim.
Falsehood derives from power the authority of truth,
And by falsifying truth deems itself true.
Its creative word transforms poison into nectar.
It says to good, "Thou art bad," and Good becomes Evil.
O thou that art heedless of the trust committed to thee,
Esteem thyself superior to both worlds $7 !
Gain knowledge of Life's mysteries!
Be a tyrant! Ignore all except God !
O man of understanding, open thine eyes, ears, and lips ! $8
If then thou seest not the Way of Truth, laugh at me!
*
1. Murtaza, "he. whom God is pleased," is a name of Ali Bu Turab means literally "father of earth."

2. A miracle attributed to Ali.

3. The fortress of Khaibar, a village in the Hijaz. was captured by the Muslim in A.D. 628. Ali Performed great feats of valour on this occasion.

4. A river of Paradise.

5. According to the Tradition of the Prophet, "I am the city of Knowledge and Ali is its gate."

6. The burning pyre on which Abraham was thrown lost its beat and was transformed into a rose-garden.

7. The "trust" which God offered to Man and which Man accepted, after it had been refused by Heaven and Earth (Koran. ch. 33, v. 72), is the divine vicegerency, i.e., the duty of displaying the divine attributes.

8. A parody of the verse in the Masnavi quoted above.
*

*

*