’’در بیان اینکہ خودی از عشق و محبت استحکام می پذیرد‘‘
*
نقطۂ نوری کہ نام او خودی است
زیر خاک ما شرار زندگی است
از محبت می شود پایندہ تر
زندہ تر سوزندہ تر تابندہ تر
از محبت اشتعال جوہرش
ارتقای ممکنات مضمرش
فطرت او آتش اندوزد ز عشق
عالم افروزی بیاموزد ز عشق
عشق را از تیغ و خنجر باک نیست
اصل عشق از آب و باد و خاک نیست
در جہان ہم صلح و ہم پیکار عشق
آب حیوان تیغ جوہر دار عشق
از نگاہ عشق خارا شق شود
عشق حق آخر سراپا حق شود
عاشقی آموز و محبوبی طلب
چشم نوحی قلب ایوبی طلب
کیمیا پیدا کن از مشت گلی
بوسہ زن بر آستان کاملی
شمع خود را ہمچو رومی بر فروز
روم را در آتش تبریز سوز
ہست معشوقی نہان اندر دلت
چشم اگر دارے بیا بنمایمت
عاشقان او ز خوبان خوب تر
خوشتر و زیباتر و محبوب تر
دل ز عشق او توانا می شود
خاک ھمدوش ثریا می شود
خاک نجد از فیض او چالاک شد
آمد اندر وجد و بر افلاک شد
در دل مسلم مقام مصطفی است
آبروی ما ز نام مصطفی است
طور موجے از غبار خانہ اش
کعبہ را بیت الحرم کاشانہ اش
کمتر از آنی ز اوقاتش ابد
کاسب افزایش از ذاتش ابد
بوریا ممنون خواب راحتش
تاج کسرے زیر پای امتش
در شبستان حرا خلوت گزید
قوم و آئین و حکومت آفرید
ماند شبہا چشم او محروم نوم
تا بہ تخت خسروی خوابیدہ قوم
وقت ہیجا تیغ او آہن گداز
دیدہ ی او اشکبار اندر نماز
در دعای نصرت آمین تیغ او
قاطع نسل سلاطین تیغ او
در جھان آئین نو آغاز کرد
مسند اقوام پیشین در نورد
از کلید دین در دنیا گشاد
ہمچو او بطن ام گیتی نزاد
در نگاہ او یکے بالا و پست
با غلام خویش بر یک خوان نشست
در مصافی پیش آن گردون سریر
دختر سردار طی آمد اسیر
پای در زنجیر و ہم بے پردہ بود
گردن از شرم و حیا خم کردہ بود
دخترک را چون نبی بی پردہ دید
چادر خود پیش روی او کشید
ما از آن خاتون طی عریان تریم
پیش اقوام جہان بی چادریم
روز محشر اعتبار ماست او
در جہان ہم پردہ دار ماست او
لطف و قہر او سراپا رحمتی
آن بیاران این باعدا رحمتی
آن کہ بر اعدا در رحمت گشاد
مکہ را پیغام ’’لاتثریب‘‘ داد
ما کہ از قید وطن بیگانہ ایم
چون نگہ نور دو چشمیم و یکیم
از حجاز و چین و ایرانیم ما
شبنم یک صبح خندانیم ما
مست چشم ساقی بطحاستیم
در جہان مثل می و میناستیم
امتیازات نسب را پاک سوخت
آتش او این خس و خاشاک سوخت
چون گل صد برگ ما را بو یکیست
اوست جان این نظام و او یکیست
سر مکنون دل او ما بدیم
نعرۂ بی باکانہ زد افشا شدیم
شور عشقش در نے خاموش من
می تپد صد نغمہ در آغوش من
من چہ گویم از تولایش کہ چیست
خشک چوبی در فراق او گریست
ہستی مسلم تجلے گاہ او
طور ہا بالد ز گرد راہ او
پیکرم را آفرید آئینہ اش
صبح من از آفتاب سینہ اش
در تپید دمبدم آرام من
گرم تر از صبح محشر شام من
ابر آذار است و من بستان او
تاک من نمناک از باران او
چشم در کشت محبت کاشتم
از تماشا حاصلی برداشتم
خاک یثرب از دو عالم خوشتر است
ای خنک شہری کہ آنجا دلبر است
کشتہ ی انداز ملا جامیم
نظم و نثر او علاج خامیم
شعر لبریز معانی گفتہ است
در ثنای خواجہ گوہر سفتہ است
’’نسخۂ کونین را دیباچہ اوست
جملہ عالم بندگان و خواجہ اوست‘‘

کیفیت ہا خیزد از صبہای عشق
ہست ہم تقلید از اسمای عشق
کامل بسطام در تقلید فرد
اجتناب از خوردن خربوزہ کرد
عاشقی ؟ محکم شو از تقلید یار
تا کمند تو شود یزدان شکار
اندکی اندر حرای دل نشین
ترک خود کن سوی حق ہجرت گزین
محکم از حق شو سوی خود گام زن
لات و عزای ہوس را سر شکن
لشکری پیدا کن از سلطان عشق
جلوہ گر شو بر سر فاران عشق
تا خدای کعبہ بنوازد ترا
شرح ’’انے جاعل‘‘ سازد ترا
 

*
SHOWING THAT THE SELF IS STRENGTHENED BY LOVE.
*

*
THE luminous point whose name is the Self
Is the life-spark beneath our dust.
By Love it is made more I sting,
More living, more burning, more glowing.
From Love proceeds the radiance of its being.
And the development of its unknown possibilities.
Its nature gathers fire from Love,
Love instructs it to illumine the world.
Love fears neither sword nor dagger,
Love is not born of water and air and earth.
Love makes peace and war in the world,
Love is the Fountain of Life, Love is the flashing sword of Death.
The hardest rocks are shivered by Love's glance:
Love of God at last becomes wholly God,
Learn thou to love, and seek a beloved:
Seek an eye like Noah's, a heart like Job's !
Transmute thy handful of earth into gold,
Kiss the threshold of a Perfect Man! $1
Like Rumi, light the candle
And burn Rum in the fire of Tabriz ! $2
There is a beloved hidden within thine heart:
I will show him to thee, if thou hast eyes to see.
His lovers are fairer than the fair,
Sweeter and comelier and more beloved.
By. love of him the heart is made strong
And earth rubs shoulders with the Pleiades.
The soil of Najd was quickened by his grace
And fell into a rapture and rose to the skies $3
In the Muslim 's heart is the home of Muhammad,
All our glory is from the name of Muhammad.
Sinai is but an eddy of the dust of his house,
His dwelling-place is a sanctuary to the Ka'ba itself.
Eternity is less than a moment of his time,
Eternity receives increase, from his essence.
He slept on a mat of rushes,
But the crown of Chosroes was under his people's feet.
He chose the nightly solitude of Mount Hira,
And he founded a state and laws and government.
He passed many a night with sleepless eyes
In order that the Muslims might sleep on the throne of Persia.
In the hour of battle, iron was melted by the fash of his sword;
In the hour of prayer, tears fell like rain from his eye.
When he prayed for Divine help, his sword answered "Amen"
And extirpated the race of kings.
He instituted new laws in the world,
He brought the empires of antiquity to an end.
With the key of religion he opened the door of this world:
The womb of the world never bore his like.
In his sight high and low were one,
He sat with his slave at one table.
The daughter of the chieftain of Tai was taken prisoner in battle $4
And brought into that exalted presence
Her feet in chains, unveiled, she was,
And her neck bowed with shame
When the Prophet saw that the -, poor girl had no veil,
He covered her face with his own mantle.
We are more naked than that lady of Tai,
We are unveiled before the nations of the world.
In him is our trust on the Day of Judgement,
And in this world too he is our protector.
Both his favour and his wrath are entirely a mercy:
That is a mercy to his friends and this to his foes.
He opened the gate of mercy to his enemies,
He gave to Mecca the message, "No penalty shall be laid upon you."
We who know not the bonds of country
Resemble sight, which is one though it be the light of two eyes.
We belong to the Hijaz and China and Persia,
Yet we are the dew of one smiling dawn.
We are all under the spell of the eye of the cup bearer from Mecca,
We are united as wine and cup.
He burnt clean away distinctions of lineage.
His fire consumed this trash and rubble.
We are like a rose with many petals but with one perfume:
He is the soul of this society, and he is one
We are the secret concealed in his heart:
He spake out fearlessly, and we were revealed.
The song of love for him fills my silent reed,
A hundred notes throb in my bosom.
How shall I tell what devotion he inspires ?
A block of dry wood wept at porting from him. $5
The Muslim's being is where he manifests his glory:
Many a Sinai springs from the dust on his path.
My image was created by his- mirror,
My dawn rises from the sun of his breast.
My repose is a perpetual fever,
My evening hotter than the morning of Judgment Day: $6
He is the April cloud and I his garden,
My vine is bedewed with his rain.
Ii sowed mine eye in the field of Love
And reaped, a harvest of vision.
"The soil of Medina is sweeter than both worlds:
Oh, happy the town where dwell the Beloved!" $7
I am lost in admiration of the style of Mulla Jami:
His verse and prose are a remedy for my immaturity.
He has written poetry overflowing with beautiful ideas;
And has threaded pearls in praise of the Master-
"Muhammad is the preface to the book of the universe;
All the worlds are slaves and he is the Master."
From the wine of Love spring many spiritual qualities:
Amongst the attributes of Love is blind devotion.
The saint of Bistam, who in devotion was unique,
Abstained from eating a water-melon. $8
Be a lover constant in devotion to thy beloved,
That thou mayst cast thy nose and capture God.
Sojourn for a while on the Hira of the heart. $9
Abandon self and flee to God.
Strengthened by God, return to they self
And break the heads of the Lat and Uzza of sensuality. $10
By the might of Love evoke an army
Reveal thyself on the Faran of Love, $11
That the Lord of the Ka'ba may show thee favour
And make thee the object of the text, "Lo, I will appoint a vicegerent on the earth." $12
*
1. A prophet or saint.

2. See note on line 95, Tabriz is an allusion to Sbams-i-Tabrez the spiritual director of Jalal-u'ddin Rumi

3. Najd. the Highlands of Arabia, is celebrated in love-remance, I need only mention Liala and Majnun.

4. Her father Hatim of Tai, is proverbial in the East for his hospitality.

5. The story of the pulpit that wept when Muhammad descended from it occurs. I think. in the Masnavi.

6. When according to Muhammadans belief, the sun will rise in the west.

7. A quotation from the Masnavi. The Prophet was buried at Medina.

8. Bayazid of Bistun died in A.D. 875. He refused to eat a water-melon. saying he had no assurance that the Prophet had even tested that fruit.

9. Muhammad used to retire to a cave On Mount Hira near Mecca. for purpose of solitary meditation.

10. Lat and Uzza were goddesses worshipped by the heathen Arabs- O neighborhood

11. Faran, name of a mountain in the of Mccea

12. Koran, ch. 2,v, 28. in them words, which were addressed to the angels. God foretold the creation of Adam.
*

*

*