چاند
*
اے چاند! حسن تيرا فطرت کي آبرو ہے
طوف حريم خاکي تيري قديم خو ہے
يہ داغ سا جو تيرے سينے ميں ہے نماياں
عاشق ہے تو کسي کا، يہ داغ آرزو ہے؟
ميں مضطرب زميں پر، بے تاب تو فلک پر
تجھ کو بھي جستجو ہے ، مجھ کو بھي جستجو ہے
انساں ہے شمع جس کي ، محفل وہي ہے تيري؟
ميں جس طرف رواں ہوں ، منزل وہي ہے تيري؟
تو ڈھونڈتا ہے جس کو تاروں کي خامشي ميں
پوشيدہ ہے وہ شايد غوغائے زندگي ميں
استادہ سرو ميں ہے ، سبزے ميں سو رہا ہے
بلبل ميں نغمہ زن ہے ، خاموش ہے کلي ميں
آ ! ميں تجھے دکھاؤں رخسار روشن اس کا
نہروں کے آئنے ميں شبنم کي آرسي ميں
صحرا و دشت و در ميں ، کہسار ميں وہي ہے
انساں کے دل ميں ، تيرے رخسار ميں وہي ہے
*
THE MOON
*
This short poem contains two concepts, i.e. those of the relationship between Love of God and His `ibadah and the other is the theory of Wahdat-al-Shuhud. The first one is contained in the first three verses and states that Love of God and His ‘ibadah are inseparable from each other. `Ibadah is meaningless without His Love and the culmination of love is His real ‘Ibadah (in the board sense). This is supported by the Holy Qur’an of which six references have been selected. The whole of Surah 55, (Al Rahman) is full of one of the most beautiful literary pieces in which the signs of God in the Afaq are enumerated on the basis of which appeal is made to Man to Love and worship Him in the broad sense. The opening verses of Surahs 57, 59 and 61 command all creation to sing His Praises as an expression of their Love for Him. Similarly the opening verses of Surahs 62 and 64 state that al creation does in fact sing His praises as an expression of their ardent Love for Him. For more details of `ibadah.
*
O moon! Your beauty is the dignity of creation
Circumambulating the earthly sanctuary $1 is your old habit

This something like a spot which appears on your breast
Are you someone’s Lover? Is this the Longing’s scar?

I am restless on the earth, you are impatient in the sky
You are also in search, I am also in search

Man is the candle of the congregation which is also yours
The direction in which I am going is also your destination

The one you are searching for in the stars’ silence
Perhaps is concealed in the commotion of life

It is standing is the cypress tree, is sleeping in the verdure
Is singing in the nightingale, is silent in the flower bud

Come, I shall show you His luminous cheek
In rivers’ mirror, in dew’s looking glass

In forest, in mountains in everything only He exists
In the heart of Man, in your cheek only He exists
*
1. Earthly Sanctuary- Metaphor for Earth.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-14.mp3
*


Ae Chand! Husn Tera Fitrat Ki Aabru Hai

Tof-e-Hareem-e-Khaki Teri Qadeem Khu Hai

Ye Dagh Sa Jo Tere Seene Mein Hai Namayan

Ashiq Hai Tu Kisi Ka, Ye Dagh-e-Arzu Hai?

Mein Mutarib Zameen Par, Betab Tu Falak Par

Tujh Ko Bhi Justujoo Hai, Mujh Ko Bhi Justujoo Hai

Insan Hai Shama Jis Ki, Mehfil Wohi Hai Teri?

Main Jis Taraf Rawan Hun, Manzil Wohi Hai Teri?

Tu Dhoondta Hai Jis Ko Taron Ki Khamashi Mein

Poshida Hai Woh Shaid Ghoghaye Zindagi Mein

Istada Saru Mein Hai, Sabze Mein So Raha Hai

Bulbul Mein Naghma-Zan Hai, Khamosh Hai Kali Mein

Aa ! Mein Tujhe Dikhaon Rukhsar-e-Roshan Uss Ka

Nehron Ke Aaeene Mein, Shabnam Ki Aarasi Mein

Sehra-o-Dasht-o-Dar Mein, Kuhsar Mein Wohi Hai

Insan Ke Dil Mein, Tere Rukhsar Mein Wohi Hai
*
