طلوع اسلام
*
دليل صبح روشن ہے ستاروں کي تنک تابي
افق سے آفتاب ابھرا ،گيا دور گراں خوابي
عروق مردئہ مشرق ميں خون زندگي دوڑا
سمجھ سکتے نہيں اس راز کو سينا و فارابي
مسلماں کو مسلماں کر ديا طوفان مغرب نے
تلاطم ہائے دريا ہي سے ہے گوہر کي سيرابي
عطا مومن کو پھر درگاہ حق سے ہونے والا ہے
شکوہ ترکماني، ذہن ہندي، نطق اعرابي
!اثر کچھ خواب کا غنچوں ميں باقي ہے تو اے بلبل
''نوا را تلخ تر مي زن چو ذوق نغمہ کم يابي''
تڑپ صحن چمن ميں، آشياں ميں ، شاخساروں ميں
جدا پارے سے ہو سکتي نہيں تقدير سيمابي
وہ چشم پاک بيں کيوں زينت برگستواں ديکھے
نظر آتي ہے جس کو مرد غازي کي جگر تابي
ضمير لالہ ميں روشن چراغ آرزو کر دے
چمن کے ذرے ذرے کو شہيد جستجو کر دے
سرشک چشم مسلم ميں ہے نيساں کا اثر پيدا
خليل اللہ کے دريا ميں ہوں گے پھر گہر پيدا
کتاب ملت بيضا کي پھر شيرازہ بندي ہے
يہ شاخ ہاشمي کرنے کو ہے پھر برگ و بر پيدا
ربود آں ترک شيرازي دل تبريز و کابل را
صبا کرتي ہے بوئے گل سے اپنا ہم سفر پيدا
اگر عثمانيوں پر کوہ غم ٹوٹا تو کيا غم ہے
کہ خون صد ہزار انجم سے ہوتي ہے سحر پيدا
جہاں باني سے ہے دشوار تر کار جہاں بيني
جگر خوں ہو تو چشم دل ميں ہوتي ہے نظر پيدا
ہزاروں سال نرگس اپني بے نوري پہ روتي ہے
بڑي مشکل سے ہوتا ہے چمن ميں ديدہ ور پيدا
نوا پيرا ہو اے بلبل کہ ہو تيرے ترنم سے
کبوتر کے تن نازک ميں شاہيں کا جگر پيدا
ترے سينے ميں ہے پوشيدہ راز زندگي کہہ دے
مسلماں سے حديث سوز و ساز زندگي کہہ دے
خدائے لم يزل کا دست قدرت تو، زباں تو ہے
يقيں پيدا کر اے غافل کہ مغلوب گماں تو ہے
پرے ہے چرخ نيلي فام سے منزل مسلماں کي
ستارے جس کي گرد راہ ہوں، وہ کارواں تو ہے
مکاں فاني ، مکيں آني، ازل تيرا، ابد تيرا
خدا کا آخري پيغام ہے تو، جاوداں تو ہے
حنا بند عروس لالہ ہے خون جگر تيرا
تري نسبت براہيمي ہے، معمار جہاں تو ہے
تري فطرت اميں ہے ممکنات زندگاني کي
جہاں کے جوہر مضمر کا گويا امتحاں تو ہے
جہان آب و گل سے عالم جاويد کي خاطر
نبوت ساتھ جس کو لے گئي وہ ارمغاں تو ہے
يہ نکتہ سرگزشت ملت بيضا سے ہے پيدا
کہ اقوام زمين ايشيا کا پاسباں تو ہے
سبق پھر پڑھ صداقت کا ، عدالت کا ، شجاعت کا
ليا جائے گا تجھ سے کام دنيا کي امامت کا
يہي مقصود فطرت ہے، يہي رمز مسلماني
اخوت کي جہاں گيري، محبت کي فراواني
بتان رنگ و خوں کو توڑ کر ملت ميں گم ہو جا
نہ توراني رہے باقي، نہ ايراني، نہ افغاني
!ميان شاخساراں صحبت مرغ چمن کب تک
ترے بازو ميں ہے پرواز شاہين قہستاني
گمان آباد ہستي ميں يقيں مرد مسلماں کا
بياباں کي شب تاريک ميں قنديل رہباني
مٹايا قيصر و کسري کے استبداد کو جس نے
وہ کيا تھا، زور حيدر، فقر بوذر، صدق سلماني
ہوئے احرار ملت جادہ پيما کس تجمل سے
تماشائي شگاف در سے ہيں صديوں کے زنداني
ثبات زندگي ايمان محکم سے ہے دنيا ميں
کہ الماني سے بھي پائندہ تر نکلا ہے توراني
جب اس انگارئہ خاکي ميں ہوتا ہے يقيں پيدا
تو کر ليتا ہے يہ بال و پر روح الاميں پيدا
غلامي ميں نہ کام آتي ہيں شمشيريں نہ تدبيريں
جو ہو ذوق يقيں پيدا تو کٹ جاتي ہيں زنجيريں
کوئي اندازہ کر سکتا ہے اس کے زور بازو کا
نگاہ مرد مومن سے بدل جاتي ہيں تقديريں
ولايت ، پادشاہي ، علم اشيا کي جہاں گيري
يہ سب کيا ہيں، فقط اک نکتہء ايماں کي تفسيريں
براہيمي نظر پيدا مگر مشکل سے ہوتي ہے
ہوس چھپ چھپ کے سينوں ميں بنا ليتي ہے تصويريں
تميز بندہ و آقا فساد آدميت ہے
حذر اے چيرہ دستاں! سخت ہيں فطرت کي تغريريں
حقيقت ايک ہے ہر شے کي، خاکي ہو کہ نوري ہو
لہو خورشيد کا ٹپکے اگر ذرے کا دل چيريں
يقيں محکم، عمل پيہم، محبت فاتح عالم
جہاد زندگاني ميں ہيں يہ مردوں کي شمشيريں
چہ بايد مرد را طبع بلندے ، مشرب نابے
دل گرمے ، نگاہ پاک بينے ، جان بيتابے
عقابي شان سے جھپٹے تھے جو ، بے بال و پر نکلے
ستارے شام کے خون شفق ميں ڈوب کر نکلے
ہوئے مدفون دريا زير دريا تيرنے والے
طمانچے موج کے کھاتے تھے ، جو ، بن کر گہر نکلے
غبار رہ گزر ہيں، کيميا پر ناز تھا جن کو
جبينيں خاک پر رکھتے تھے جو، اکسير گر نکلے
ہمارا نرم رو قاصد پيام زندگي لايا
خبر ديتي تھيں جن کو بجلياں وہ بے خبر نکلے
حرم رسوا ہوا پير حرم کي کم نگاہي سے
جوانان تتاري کس قدر صاحب نظر نکلے
زميں سے نوريان آسماں پرواز کہتے تھے
يہ خاکي زندہ تر، پائندہ تر، تابندہ تر نکلے
جہاں ميں اہل ايماں صورت خورشيد جيتے ہيں
ادھر ڈوبے ، ادھر نکلے ادھر ڈوبے ، ادھر نکلے
يقيں افراد کا سرمايہ تعمير ملت ہے
يہي قوت ہے جو صورت گر تقدير ملت ہے
تو راز کن فکاں ہے، اپني انکھوں پر عياں ہو جا
خودي کا راز داں ہو جا، خدا کا ترجماں ہو جا
ہوس نے کر ديا ہے ٹکڑے ٹکڑے نوع انساں کو
اخوت کا بياں ہو جا، محبت کي زباں ہو جا
يہ ہندي، وہ خراساني، يہ افغاني، وہ توراني
تو اے شرمندئہ ساحل! اچھل کر بے کراں ہو جا
غبار آلودئہ رنگ ونسب ہيں بال و پر تيرے
تو اے مرغ حرم! اڑنے سے پہلے پرفشاں ہو جا
خودي ميں ڈوب جا غافل! يہ سر زندگاني ہے
نکل کر حلقہ شام و سحر سے جاوداں ہو جا
مصاف زندگي ميں سيرت فولاد پيدا کر
شبستان محبت ميں حرير و پرنياں ہو جا
گزر جا بن کے سيل تند رو کوہ و بياباں سے
گلستاں راہ ميں آئے تو جوئے نغمہ خواں ہو جا
ترے علم و محبت کي نہيں ہے انتہا کوئي
نہيں ہے تجھ سے بڑھ کر ساز فطرت ميں نوا کوئي
ابھي تک آدمي صيد زبون شہرياري ہے
قيامت ہے کہ انساں نوع انساں کا شکاري ہے
نظر کو خيرہ کرتي ہے چمک تہذيب حاضر کي
يہ صناعي مگر جھوٹے نگوں کي ريزہ کاري ہے
وہ حکمت ناز تھا جس پر خرو مندان مغرب کو
ہوس کے پنچہ خونيں ميں تيغ کارزاري ہے
تدبر کي فسوں کاري سے محکم ہو نہيں سکتا
جہاں ميں جس تمدن کي بنا سرمايہ داري ہے
عمل سے زندگي بنتي ہے جنت بھي، جہنم بھي
يہ خاکي اپني فطرت ميں نہ نوري ہے نہ ناري ہے
خروش آموز بلبل ہو ، گرہ غنچے کي وا کر دے
کہ تو اس گلستاں کے واسطے باد بہاري ہے
پھر اٹھي ايشيا کے دل سے چنگاري محبت کي
زميں جولاں گہ اطلس قبايان تتاري ہے
بيا پيدا خريدارست جان ناتوانے را
''پس از مدت گذار افتاد بر ما کاروانے را''
بيا ساقي نواے مرغ زار از شاخسار آمد
بہار آمد نگار آمد نگار آمد قرار آمد
کشيد ابر بہاري خيمہ اندر وادي و صحرا
صداے آبشاراں از فراز کوہسار آمد
سرت گردم تو ہم قانون پيشيں سازدہ ساقي
کہ خيل نغمہ پردازاں قطار اندر قطار آمد
کنار از زاہداں برگيروبے باکانہ ساغر کش
پس از مدت ازيں شاخ کہن بانگ ہزار آمد
بہ مشتاقاں حديث خواجہ بدر و حنين آور
تصرف ہاے پنہانش بچشمم آشکار آمد
دگر شاخ خليل از خون ما نم ناک مي گرد
بيازار محبت نقد ما کامل عيار آمد
سر خاک شہيدے برگہاے لالہ مي پاشم
کہ خونش با نہال ملت ما سازگار آمد
بيا تا گل بيفشانيم و مے در ساغر اندازيم ''
''فلک را سقف بشگافيم و طرح ديگر اندازيم
*
THE RENAISSANCE OF ISLAM
*
This is the last of the nine long poems in this book. Its position at about the end of the book and immediately after Khizar-i-Rah is not incidental. Many poems in the book express ‘Allamah Iqbal’s frustration at the state of affairs in the Muslim world and the Muslim society in it. Khizar-i-Rah is the last such poem . Perusal of these poems creates some degree of frustration in the reader which is only temporary till he reads the next poem. tulu-i-Islam leaves the reader filled with lasting enthusiasm produced by the message of hope contained in it, as he finishes the serious part of the book.

The poem was written in the early 1920s soon after World War I, and deals with the aftermath of that war with respect to the Muslims. Though it deals with the defeat and dismemberment of the `Uthmaniyah Khilafah into small secular nation states and complete subjugation of these states by the Western Christian powers at the end of the war, it brings the good news of hope and encouragement. It consists of nine stanzas, each with a different cadence and covers the following subjects:

1. The starting point and the leading theme is the reassuring thought that the time has come for re-awakening of the Muslim world and re-assertion of Islamic values.

2. In order to regain their past glories Muslims must:

(a) Recognize the elevated place of Man in the universe, which can be attained only by acquiring Islamic virtues, and appreciate the unity of mankind, which is above race and color. This is also the essence of the teachings of the Holy Qur’an as has been explained and documented at appropriate places earlier.

(b) Recognize their high destiny as the architect of the new world order.

(c) Review the degeneration of the Muslim world, which has resulted from complaisance and ignoring the message of God in the Holy Qur’an.

(d) Recognize the value of Iman and develop it in their lives.

(e) Work together in the struggle for establishment of a new world order of a united super-national millat instead of unconnected geographical nations.

3. Attention has been drawn to the ethical degeneration of the Western world and society to show the impropriety and inadequacy of their norms as guidelines for the Muslim world.
*
The fading glitter of stars is the signal of a bright dawn
The sun has risen from the horizon, the time of deep stupor is gone!

Life-blood has started flowing through the dead arteries of the East
This secret is incomprehensible to Sana $1 and Faraba ! $2

The storm of the West has made the Muslim into a real Muslim
Only the upheavals of the sea bring the pearl’s beauty to its perfection

The Muslim is to be endowed again from the God’s Court with
Turkoman’s dignity $3 , Indian’s intellect $4 , Arab’s eloquence $5

If some slumber is lurking still in the flower buds
“Strike the beat harder if the taste for music is lacking” $6

Jump restlessly in the garden, in the nest, in bowers
It is impossible to deprive mercury of its restlessness

Why should the eye used to chaste things see coat of arms
When it is able to see the valor of the Ghaza’s $7 soul!

O God, light the candle of Longing in the tulip’s heart
Make every speck of garden’s dust a martyr searching for the Truth

The effect of spring showers exists $8 in the Muslim’s tears
Pearls are to be produced again in the ocean of Ibraham

The Book of the Muslim nation is being organized again
This Hashimite Branch $9 is going to blossom again!

The beloved of Shiraz has won the hearts of Tabriz and Kabul $10
The zephyr produces its fellow traveler from rose’ fragrance!

The avalanche of calamity over Uthmanis is not to be bereaved
As the dawn is produced after destruction of myriad’s of stars!

Insight into the world is more difficult than the world’s sovereignty
Insight is produced only when the heart melts into blood!

For thousands of years narcissus bemoans its lack of luster
The discerning person is produced in the garden with difficulty

Sing O Nightingale so that with your modulations
The falcon’s heart in the pigeon’s frail body be produced

Concealed within your heart is the secret of life
Relate to the Muslim the traditions of pathos of life

You are the potent hand and the word of the Eternal God
O imprudent one! Develop Faith as you have been overcome with doubts $11

The Muslim’s destination is beyond the azure colored sky
You are the caravan the dust of whose trail are stars!

The house is ephemeral, the dweller is momentary, yours are the Beginning and the End
You are the Final Message of God and you are eternal!

Your life-blood adorns with myrtle the bride called tulip
Your origin is from Ibraham, you are the world’s architect!

Your nature is the custodian of all life’s possibilities
So to say you are the touch-stone for world’s hidden jewels!

From the material world to the Eternal world
You are the gift which the Holy Prophet took!

The history of the Muslim nation reveals the secret
That you are the protector of the nations of Asia

Learn again the lesson of Truth, Justice, and Bravery
You are to be entrusted with the world’s leadership!

This alone is the creation’s objective, this alone is Islam’s secret
That there should be universal brotherhood, abundant love!

Breaking the idols of race and color merge into the millat
There should be neither Turanian $12 , nor Iranian, nor Afghanian!

How long the companionship of garden’s birds inside the garden’s confines?
Your wings are capable of the flight of Quhistan’s $13 falcon!

In the world of existence full of doubts, the Muslim’s Faith
Is like a beacon of light in the dark night of the wilderness’

What could demolish the grandeur of Qaiser $14 and Kisra $15 ?
Nothing but Haider’s $16 prowess, Bu Dhar’s $17 faqr $18 , Salman’s $19 truth

With what dignity did the free men of the millat march out?
The centuries-old prisoners are only watching the spectacle through door’s crevices!

Stability of life in this world is bestowed by firm Faith
The Turanian has proved even longer lasting than the German $20

When Faith is created in this earthly ember
It itself creates wings and plumage of Jibril!

Neither swords nor plans are of any avail in slavery
Chains are cast away when taste for Faith is created

Can anyone assess the strength of his arms?
Destinies are changed by the Believer’s mere glance!

Sainthood, sovereignty, the universality of material knowledge
What are all these except unraveling of the secrets of Faith!

It is however difficult to develop Ibraham’s vision
Greed creates subconscious images stealthily in the vision!

The ruled and ruler’s discrimination is the bane of humanity
Beware, O oppressors the punishments of God for this are severe!

The essence of everything is the same, be it of dust or light
Sun’s blood would drip by cutting the core of dust’s speck $21

Firm Faith, constant struggle, Love, conquest of the universe
These are the swords for the brave men in the battle of life

What is expected from the brave? High disposition, sincere creed
Warm heart, immaculate vision and restless soul!

Those who had attacked like eagle emerged as wingless $22
The evening stars after diving into dusk’s blood emerged shining!

Those accustomed to swimming under the sea were buried under the sea
Those who bored ocean waves’ dashes emerged as pearls! $23

Those who were proud of alchemy are like the way side dust
Those who humbly prostrated before God emerged as elixir makers $24 !

Our slow-moving messenger has brought the message of life
Those who got electric messages emerged as uninformed $25 !

The Haram has been disgraced by the priests’ short-sight
With what excellent insight the Tatar youth have come out $26 !

Angels, the denizens of celestial world, were saying to the earth
These earthly men emerged more lively, more virulent, more splendid!

The men of Faith live in the world like the sun
Set here, come out there, set there, come out here $27 !

The individual’s Faith is the means of national renaissance
This is the force which shapes the nation’s destiny!

You are the secret of Kun Fikan $28 , be manifest to yourself
Become the knower of the secret of Khuda, become interpreter of God

Human greed has torn the human race into pieces
Be the declaration of fraternity, become the language of Love

This is Indian, that Khurasanian, this Afghanian, that Turanian is
O you disgraced by nationalism, jump out and become boundless

Your wings and plumage are polluted with race and color’s dust
O Haram’s bird $29 flutter your wings before you become ready for flight

O imprudent one! Dive in Khuda , this is the secret of life
Relinquishing the narrow confines of time become eternal

In the battle of life acquire the nature of steel
In the Love’s bed-chamber become soft like silk $30

Transcend mountains and deserts like a furious flood
If there be a garden in your path, become a melodious brook

The bounds of your Knowledge and Love are none
Melody sweeter than you in the Divine orchestra is none!

Humanity is still the helpless prey to imperialism
Outrageous that Man is the hunter of the human race!

The glitter of modern civilization dazzles the eye
But this is the luster of unreal jewels only!

The science which was the pride of the West’s sages
Is the battle-sword in the blood-stained clutches of greed! $31

The magic of prudence cannot make stable
The civilization which is based on capitalism $32

Dynamism establishes life; bestows heaven as well as hell
This earthly creature in its nature is neither angelic nor infernal

Partake the nightingale’s clamor, open the flower bud
As your person is the spring breeze for this garden $33

The spark of Love has again risen from the Asia’s heart
The world is the parading ground of the satin-clad Tatars

Come, a purchaser has appeared for this frail soul
“After a long time a caravan has arrived at our place” $34

Come, O cup-bearer, the sad bird’s music is coming from the bower
Spring has come, the beloved has come, as the beloved has come tranquillity has come!

The spring cloud has established its camp up hill and down dale
The sound of waterfalls from the mountain tops has come!

I have surrendered my life to you, O cup-bearer, you should also sing the future’s songs
Because in rows after rows groups of singing birds have come!

Withdraw from the ascetics and fearlessly draw the wine cup
After long nightingale’s song from this old branch has come!

Narrate to Lovers the traditions of Badr and Hunain’s Master $35
His hidden meanings clear to my eyes have become $36 !

The other branch of Khalal $37 is greening up with our blood
In Love’s market-place our currency full value has become

I am sprinkling tulip petals at the martyr’s grave
As his blood favorable to our nation’s sapling has become!

“Come, so that we may sprinkle flowers and pour wine in cup
Rend asunder the sky’s roof and establish a new foundation”
*
1. Abu Ala Husain `Abd Allah Ibn Hasan Ibn ‘Ala Sana.

2. Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn tarakhan Nasr Farabi.

The above two intellectuals are very eminent philosophers of the Muslim world. The former was also a very famous physician whose books were used as text books in Europe till only about two centuries ago. What ‘Allamah Iqbal means is that even these two luminaries of the intellectual world are unable to understand the secrets of Divine and spiritual knowledge through which the miracles related in this verse had been enacted.

3. Turkomans- They are members of any of the chiefly Muslim Turkish tribes inhabiting Turkomanistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakistan. During the period of the zenith of the Muslim world the people of this region were a formidable force and ruled over a vast territory from Central Asia to India. They were very much respected for their prowess and political power.

4. In ancient times in the fourth and fifth centuries B.C. India was famous for its learning and intellect. In this respect it was one of the five prominent cultures of that period, viz. Indian, Greek, Zoroastrian, Egyptian, and Chinese.

5. In the pre-Islamic as well as in the early Islamic period Arabs were famous for their proficiency in language. They were so proud of the richness, prosody and rhetoric of their language that they called other nations as dumb and mute (`ajam). This word became and still is synonymous with “non-Arab” though the epithet no longer applies.

6. This is the first line of a verse of the famous Persian poet of India, Saiyyid Muhammad Jamal al-Dan Urfa. The complete verse is as follows:

(223) Strike the beat harder if the taste for music is lacking
Strike livelier the marching songs if the load is heavy

7. Ghaza- He is a Muslim fighter in the cause of God.

8. Nesan- This is the spring rain. In Persian and Urdu legends its drops are believed to produce pearls in some bivalves. The metaphor means that the tears produced by the Muslims’ eyes as a result of the calamities they are facing will result in pearls, i.e. their apparent calamities will soon turn into successes.

9. Hashima, “Hashimite Branch” or Bana Hashim- This is the branch of the Ismelite section of the progeny of S. Ibraham A.S. As the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) belonged to Bana Hashim the term is extended to all Muslims.

10. Turk-i Sharaza- This refers to Shaikh Musleh al-Dan Sa`da Sharaza. His poetry is very popular among all Muslims including Afghans, which is a sign of the attachment of Muslims to their heritage.

11. This verse stresses the importance of aman in achieving success.

12. Turana- The term applies to any of the peoples who live in Turan, which is the region north of the River Oxus.

13. Quhistan- This is a tract of land in Kerman, now in Iran. The falcons of Quhistan are famous for the elegance and swiftness of flight.

14. Qaiser- This is the collective name for the Caesars of the Roman Empire.

15. Kisra- He is the Persian Emperor in whose reign Iran was conquered by Muslims.

16. Haider- This is another name of S. ‘Ala R.A.

17. Abu Dhar- He is a well known companion of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) who is proverbial for his piety, which includes Faqr.

18. Faqr.

19. Salman.

20. Reference to the continuation of war by the Turks against Greeks after the formal termination of World War I. As the Greeks were fighting on the strength of British support this was really a war against the British, who were a world power at that time.

21. Allusion to the creation and existence of the spiritual universe, which also contained angels, made of light, and the material universe, which includes Man made of dust. This verse, read with the previous one means all creation of God is equal.

22. Reference to the defeat of Germans in World War I which rendered them powerless.

23. Allusion to the inability of submarines, invented by Germans, to win the war.

24. Allusion to scientists and materialists.

25. Allusion to spiritual persons whose spiritual powers attain what arms and ammunition cannot.

26. This refers to the damage to the Holy Land and the world of Islam in general and to the glory and sanctity of the Holy Ka‘bah in particular by the treachery of the Arabs. For details see Poem 144 (Khizar-i-Rah), Explanatory Note 7.

27. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 2:154 and 3:169, according to which people who lose their physical life in the cause of God should not be considered as dead. Also, the light of Truth which illuminates the heart of a man of Faith cannot be extinguished. Faith keeps on fighting and struggling in the pursuit of their goal incessantly all over the world in cooperation with each other . This makes the infidels lose the war at the end.

28. This is an invitation to Muslims to realize the greatness of Man and specially that of Muslims, whose life is totally dedicated to God and who live for and die in His cause. This whole stanza is an invitation to the Muslim Ummah to acquire Islamic virtues.

29. Haram’s Bird- Allusion to the Muslim Ummah.

30. This and the next verse is an allusion to the Holy Qur’an 48:29, which instructs Muslims to unite and be firm against infidels and kind and affectionate to believers.

31. Allusion to the atrocities to and usurpation of the wealth of non-European peoples, especially Muslims by the Europe’s imperialist nations during their entire history.

32. This is a warning by ‘Allamah Iqbal that the Western system, based on capitalism-imperialism, will not last in spite of the magic of political maneuvering. In view of the collapse and ultimate demise of the communist world this seems to be paradoxical. This is so because we are accustomed to considering only two systems, i.e. capitalism and communism. The Muslim world has been so much frustrated and over-awed by the glitter of the Western world that it has completely forgotten the potential of the Islamic political-economic system. ‘Allamah Iqbal’s works also give the false impression that he was pro-Communist and anti-capitalist. However, a little thought and deep study of his works would show that his support of communism was only apparent and transient and revealed only his temporary satisfaction in the sense that in his view the advent of communism posed the first threat to the capitalist system. The capitalist-communist fighting gave the Muslims a respite and a golden opportunity to reconstruct their material and spiritual world and eventually be able to deal a final deadly blow to both these systems and establish the Islamic system. He has repeatedly shown his disapproval and unhappiness with the communist system, as he has done with the capitalist system. His forecast contained in this verse has been partially fulfilled in the demise of communism. Now that the Islamic world is waking up from its deep stupor the conflict with the Western world and its systems is inevitable. In this conflict the Islamic system will succeed. However, it will not come as a miracle but will have to be achieved by the Muslim world through their sweat and blood. This latter thought is conveyed in the next two verses.

33. This and the following verses to the end of the poem contain the message of hope and prompting for struggle for Muslims. The climax is reached in the last verse of the poem in which the poet invites Muslims to revolutionize the world and establish the new Islamic world order.

34. Allusion to the Holy Qur’an 12:19. The arrival of the caravan at the well into which S. Yusuf A.S. had been thrown was the turning point in his life. In the same way the present time, when the Western world is losing its credibility, is the turning point in the life of the Muslim Ummah.

35. Reference to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.). The battles of Badr and Hunain are of critical importance in Islamic history. The former was the first battle between the fledgling Millat of Muslims in Madanah Munawarrah and the pagan Quraish. This battle was critical in that the victory of Muslims brought credibility and political stability to them. The battle of Hunain was fought immediately after the conquest of Makkah Mu‘ïïamah. This battle also was decisive in the sense that Muslims were almost defeated on account of their pride and reliance on their numbers, arms and material resources instead of their Faith in the Truth of their mission and the help of God. Ultimately, the Muslims were victorious. This victory completed the sovereignty of the Islamic State of Madinah over the Arabian Peninsula and provided the launching pad for their expansion into the world.

36. The Muslim Ummah.

37. For Khalal.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/03-70.mp3
*
Daleel-E-Subah-E-Roshan Hai Sitaron Ki Tunak Tabi
Ufaq Se Aftab Ubhra, Gya Dour-E-Garan Khawabi



Urooq-E-Murda’ay Mashriq Mein Khoon-E-Zindagi Dora
Samajh Sakte Nahin Iss Raaz Ko Seena-O-Farabi


Musalman Ko Musalman Kar Diya Toofan-E-Maghrib Ne
Talatum Haye Darya Hi Se Hai Gohar Ki Seerabi


Atta Momin Ko Phir Dargah-E-Haq Se Hone Wala Hai
Shikoh-E-Turkamani, Zehan-E-Hindi, Nutq-E-Arabi


Asar Kuch Khawab Ka Ghunchon Mein Baqi Hai To Ae Bulbul !
“Nawa Ra Talakh Tar Mee Zan Choo Zauq-E-Nagma Kmyabi”



Tarap Sehan-E-Chaman Mein, Ashiyan Mein, Shakhsaron Mein
Juda Pare Se Ho Sakti Nahin Taqdeer-E-Seemabi


Woh Chashm-E-Paak Been Kyun Zeenat-E-Bargistawan Dekhe
Nazar Ati Hai Jis Ko Mard-E-Ghazi Ki Jigar Tabi


Zameer-E-Lala Mein Roshan Charagh-E-Arzoo Kar De
Chaman Ke Zarre Zarre Ko Shaheed-E-Justujoo Kar De


Sar Shak-E-Chashm-E-Muslim Mein Hai Neesan Ka Asar Paida
Khalil-Allah (A.S.) Ke Darya Mein Hon Ge Phir Guhar Paida



Kitab-E-Millat-E-Baiza Ki Phir Sheeraza Bandi Hai
Ye Shakh-E-Hashmi Karne Ko Hai Phir Barg-E-Bar Paida



Rubood Aan Turk Sheerazi Dil-E-Tabraiz-O-Kabil Ra
Saba Karti Hai Buay Gul Se Apna Hamsafar Paida



Agar Usmaniyon Par Koh-E-Gham Toota To Kya Gham Hai
Ke Khoon-E-Sad Hazar Anjum Se Hoti Hai Sahar Paida

Jahan Baani Se Hai Dushwar Tar Kar-E-Jahan Beeni
Jigar Khoon Ho To Chashm-E-Dil Mein Hoti Hai Nazar Paida



Hazaron Saal Nargis Apni Benoori Pe Roti Hai
Bari Mushkil Se Hota Hai Chaman Mein Didahwar Paida



Nawa Pera Ho Ae Bulbul Ke Ho Tere Taranum Se
Kabootar Ke Tan-E-Nazuk Mein Shaheen Ka Jigar Paida



Tere Seene Mein Hai Poshida Raaz-E-Zindagi Keh De
Musalman Se Hadees-E-Soz-O-Saaz-E-Zindagi Keh De

Khuda’ay Lam Yazil Ka Dast-E-Qudrat Tu, Zuban Tu Hai
Yaqeen Paida Kar Ae Ghafil Ke Maghloob-E-Guman Tu Hai


Pare Hai Charakh-E-Neeli Faam Se Manzil Musalman Ki
Sitare Jis Ki Gard-E-Rah Hon, Woh Karwan Tu Hai



Makan Fani, Makeen Ani, Azal, Tera, Abad Tera
Khuda Ka Akhiri Pegham Hai Tu, Javidan Tu Hai


Hina Band-E-Uroos-E-Lala Hai Khoon-E-Jigar Tera
Teri Nisbat Baraheemi Hai, Mamaar-E-Jahan Tu Hai


Teri Fitrat Ameen Hai Mumkanat-E-Zindagani Ki
Jahan Ke Johar-E-Muzmar Ka Goya Imtihan Tu Hai


Jahan-E-Aab-O-Gil Se Alam-E-Javed Ki Khatir
Nabuwat Sath Jis Ko Le Gyi Woh Armgahan Tu Hai


Ye Nukta Sargazhat-E-Millat-E-Baiza Se Hai Paida
Ke Aqwam-E-Zameen-E-Asia Ka Pasban Tu Hai



Sabaq Phir Parh Sadaqat Ka, Adalat Ka, Shujaat Ka
Liya Jaye Ga Tujh Se Kaam Dunya Ki Imamat Ka


Yehi Maqsood-E-Fitrat Hai, Yehi Ramz-E-Muslamani
Akhuwat Ki Jahangeeri, Mohabat Ki Farawani



Butan-E-Rang-O-Khoon Ko Torh Kar Millat Mein Gum Ho Ja
Na Toorani Rahe Baqi, Na Irani Na Afghani


Miyan-E-Shakhsaran Sohbat-E-Murgh-E-Chaman Kab Talak!
Tere Bazu Mein Hai Parwaz-E-Shaheen-E-Kehsatani


Guman Abad-E-Hasti Mein Yaqeen Mard-E-Musalman Ka
Byaban Ki Shab-E-Tareek Mein Qindeel-E-Rahbani


Mitaya Qaisar-E-Kasra Ke Istabdad Ko Jis Ne
Woh Kya Tha, Zor-E-Haider (R.A.), Faqr-E-Bu Zar (R.A.), Sidq-E-Salmani (R.A.)



Huway Ahrar-E-Millat Jadah Pema Kis Tajamul Se
Tamashayi Shagaaf-E-Dar Se Hain Sadiyon Ke Zindani


Sabat-E-Zindagi Aeeman-E-Muhkam Se Hai Dunya Mein
Kah Almani Se Bhi Paenda Tar Nikla Hai Toorani



Jab Iss Angara’ay Khaki Mein Hota Hai Yaqeen Paida
To Kar Leta Hai Ye Bal-O-Par-E-Rooh-ul-Ameen Paida


Ghulami Mein Na Kaam Ati Hain Shamsheerain Na Tadbeerain
Jo Ho Zauq-E-Yaqeen Paida To Kat Jati Hain Zanjeerain



Koi Andaza Kar Sakta Hai Uss Ke Zor-E-Bazu Ka !
Nigah-E-Mard-E-Momin Se Badal Jati Hain Taqdeerain



Walayat, Padshahi, Ilm-E-Ashiya Ki Jahangeeri
Ye Sub Kya Hain, Faqat Ek Nukta-E-Aeeman Ki Tafseerain



Baraheemi Nazar Paida Magar Mushkil Se Hoti Hai
Hawas Chup Chup Ke Seenon Mein Bana Leti Hai Tasweerain


Tameez-E-Banda-O-Aaqa Fasad-E-Admiyat Hai
Hazar Ae Cheerah Dastan! Sakht Hain Fitrat Ki Taazirain



Haqiqat Aik Hai Har Shay Ki, Khaki Ho Ke Noori Ho
Lahoo Khursheed Ka Tapake Agar Zarre Ka Dil Cheerain



Yaqeen Mohkam, Amal Peham, Mohabbat Faateh-E-Alam
Jahad-E-Zindagani Mein Hain Ye Mardon Ki Shamsheerain



Cha Bayad Mard Ra Tabaa-E-Bulanday, Mashrab-E-Naabay
Dil-E-Garmee, Nigah-E-Pak Beenay, Jaan-E-Betabay



Auqabi Shan Se Jhapte The Jo, Bebaal-O-Par Nikle
Sitare Sham Ke Khoon-E-Shafaq Mein Doob Kar Nikle



Huway Madfoon-E-Darya Zair-E-Darya Tairne Wale
Tamanche Mouj Ke Khate The Jo, Ban Kar Guhar Nikle



Ghabar-Ereh Guzar Hain, Keemiya Par Naaz Tha Jin Ko
Jibeenain Khak Par Rakhte The Jo, Ikseer Gar Nikle



Hamara Naram Ro Qasid Peyam-E-Zindagi Laya
Khabar Deti Theen Jin Ko Bijliyan Woh Be-Khabar Nikle


Haram Ruswa Huwa Peer-E-Haram Ki Kam Nigahi Se
Jawanan-E-Tatari Kis Qadar Sahib-E-Nazar Nikle



Zameen Se Nooriyan-E-Asman Parwaz Kehte The
Ye Khaki Zinda Tar, Paenda Tar, Tabinda Tar Nikle


Jahan Mein Ahl-E-Aeeman Soorat-E-Khursheed Jeete Hain
Idhar Doobe Udhar Nikle, Udhar Doobe Idhar Nikle




Yaqeen Afrad Ka Sarmaya-E-Tameer-E-Millat Hai
Yehi Quwwat Hai Jo Soorat Gar-E-Taqdeer-E-Millat Hai

Tu Raaz-E-Kun Fakan Hai, Apni Ankhon Par Ayan Ho Ja
Khudi Ka Raazdan Ho Ja, Khuda Ka Tarjuman Ho Ja



Hawas Ne Kar Diya Tukre Tukre Nu-E-Insan Ko
Akhuwat Ka Byan Ho Ja, Mohabbat Ki Zuban Ho Ja


Ye Hindi, Who Khurasani, Ye Afghani, Who Toorani
Tu Ae Sharminda-E-Sahil ! Uchal Kar Be-Karan Ho Ja


Ghubar Aludah’ay Rang-O-Nasb Hain Baal-O-Par Tere
Tu Ae Murgh-E-Hara ! Urne Se Pehle Par-Fishan Ho Ja


Khudi Mein Doob Ja Ghafil ! Ye Sir-E-Zindagani Hai
Nikl Kar Halqa-E-Shaam-O-Sahar Se Javidan Ho Ja


Masaf-E-Zindagi Mein Seerat-E-Foulad Paida Kar
Shabistan-E-Mohabbat Mein Harair-O-Parniyan Ho Ja


Guzar Ja Ban Ke Seel-E-Tund Ro Koh-E-Byaban Se
Gulistan Rah Mein Aye To Joo’ay Naghma Khawan Ho Ja



Tere Ilm-O-Mohabbat Ki Nahin Hai Intaha Koi
Nahin Hai Tujh Se Barh Kar Saaz-E-Fitrat Mein Nawa Koi



Abhi Tak Admi Sayd-E-Zaboon-E-Sheher Yari Hai
Qayamat Hai Ke Insan Nu-E-Insan Ka Shikari Hai


Nazar Ko Kheerah Karti Hai Chamak Tehzeeb-E-Hazir Ki
Ye Sanaee Magar Jhoote Nagon Ki Rezakari Hai


Woh Hikmat Naz Tha Jis Par Khiradmandan-E-Maghrib Ko
Hawas Ke Panja’ay Khoonin Mein Taegh-E-Karzari Hai



Tadabur Ki Fasoon Kari Se Mohkam Ho Nahin Sakta
Jahan Mein Jis Tamaddan Ki Bina Sarmayadari Hai


Amal Se Zindagi Banti Hai Jannat Bhi, Jahanum Bhi
Ye Khaki Apni Fitrat Mein Na Noori Hai Na Naari Hai

Kharosh Amoz-E-Bulbul Ho, Girah Ghunche Ki Wa Kar De
Ke Tu Iss Gulistan Ke Waste Baad-E-Bahari Hai


Phir Uthi Asia Ke Dil Se Chankari Mohabbat Ki
Zameen Joulan Geh-E-Atlas Qabayan-E-Tatari Hai



Baya Paida Khareedarst Jaan-E-Natoowane Ra
“Pas Az Muddat Gudaz Aftaad Barma Karwame Ra”


Baya Saqi Nawaye Murgh-E-Zaar Az Shakhsar Amad
Bahar Amad Nigar Amad, Nigar Amad Qirar Amad



Kasheed Abar-E-Bahari Khemah Andar Wai-O-Sehra
Sada’ay Absharan Az Faraz-E-Kohsar Amad


Sarat Gardam To Ham Qanoon-E-Paisheen Saazdah Saqi
Ke Kheel-E-Naghma Pardazan Qitar Andar Qitar Amad



Kanar Az Zahadan Bargeer-O-Bebakana Saghar Kash
Pas Az Muddar Azeen Shakh-E-Kuhan Bang-E-Hazar Amad



Ba Mushtaqan Hadees-E-Khawajah (S.A.W.)-E-Badar-O-Hunain Awar
Tasarraf Haye Pinhanash Ba-Chashm Ashkar Amad



Dgar Shakh-E-Khalil (A.S.) Az Khoon-E-Ma Namnaak Mee Gardad
Babazaar-E-Mohabbat Naqad-E-Maa Kamil Ayar Amad



Sir-E-Khak Shaheeday Barg Haye Lala Mee Pasham
Ke Khawinsh Banihal-E-Millat Ma Saazgar Amad



“Baya Ta Gul Bifasha-Neeyam Wa May Dar Saghar Andazyam
Falak Ra Saqaf Bashagafiyam Wa Tarah-E-Deegar Andazyam”


*
