پيا م صبح
*
اجالا جب ہوا رخصت جبين شب کي افشاں کا
نسيم زندگي پيغام لائي صبح خنداں کا
جگايا بلبل رنگيں نوا کو آشيانے ميں
کنارے کھيت کے شانہ ہلايا اس نے دہقاں کا
طلسم ظلمت شب سورہء والنور سے توڑا
اندھيرے ميں اڑايا تاج زر شمع شبستاں کا
پڑھا خوابيدگان دير پر افسون بيداري
برہمن کو ديا پيغام خورشيد درخشاں کا
ہوئي بام حرم پر آ کے يوں گويا مؤذن سے
نہيں کھٹکا ترے دل ميں نمود مہر تاباں کا؟
پکاري اس طرح ديوار گلشن پر کھڑے ہو کر
چٹک او غنچہ گل! تو مؤذن ہے گلستاں کا
!ديا يہ حکم صحرا ميں چلو اے قافلے والو
چمکنے کو ہے جگنو بن کے ہر ذرہ بياباں کا
سوئے گور غريباں جب گئي زندوں کي بستي سے
تو يوں بولي نظارا ديکھ کر شہر خموشاں کا
ابھي آرام سے ليٹے رہو ، ميں پھر بھي آئوں گي
سلادوں گي جہاں کو خواب سے تم کو جگائوں گي
*
THE MESSAGE OF DAWN
*
While the original poem by Longfellow is only a poetic description of the coming to life of the world in the morning this adaptation goes much deeper. This poem is the explanation of the role of the light of knowledge in removing the darkness of ignorance by acquiring the knowledge of the unseen spiritual world as is alluded to in explanatory note 1. The poem also explains the role of time in controlling the activities of daily life. This subject is dealt with in detail in the first seven verses of another poem of `Allamah Iqbal titled, "Masjid-i-Qurèubah" in Bal-i-Jibral (The Wings of Jibral). The first verse is given below:

(166) The alternation of day and night, producer of all events
The alternation of day and night, Essence of life and death
*
When the sparkling of the night's forehead's decoration disappeared $1
The zephyr of life with the news of the happy morning appeared

It awakened the nightingale of flowery song in its nest
It shook the shoulder of the farmer on the field's edge

It broke the spell of darkness of night’s talisman with Surah al-Nur $2
It robbed the golden crown of bed-chamber's candle in the dark

It chanted the magic of awakening on those sleeping in the temple
It gave the Brahman the tidings of the bright sun

Arriving at the mosque's roof it said to the Mu’adhdhin $3
"Do you not fear appearance of the resplendent sun ?"

Climbing the garden's wall it cried this to the rose-bud
"Burst! You are the Mu'adhdhin of the morning O rose-bud"

It gave the command in the wilderness "Move O Caravan"!
"Every dust speck will shine like fire-fly in the wilderness"

When it reached the cemetery from the living's habitation
Witnessing the spectacle of the cemetery it spoke thus

"Remain lying in comfort still, come again shall I
Make the whole world sleep, wake you up shall I $4
*
1. Allusion to the departing of the stars at the night's end.

2. Allusion to the Holy Qur'an 24:35. It means that the real darkness of the night, which is a metaphor for the lack of knowledge of the unseen spiritual universe, is broken only with the Divine Light referred to in the above verse of the Holy Qur'an. This brings to mind the following verses about the marvels of Mu'min's power:

(167) This morning which is yesterday and today
We do not know from where it is created

(168) But the morning which shakes the Existence' bed-chamber
Surely is created by the Adhan of the Man of Faith

3. Mu’adhdhin- The person who calls Muslims to prayers. Adhan is his call.

4. Allusion to the morning of the Day of Resurrection when all those sleeping in their graves will be awakened (the Holy Qur’an 7:187; 18:99-101).
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-26.MP3
*

Ujala Jab Huwa Rukhsat Jabeen-e-Shab Ki Afshan Ka
Naseem-e-Zindagi Pegham Layi Subah-e-Khandan Ka



Jagaya Bulbul-e-Rangeen Nawa Ko Ashiyane Mein
Kinare Khait Ke Shana Hilaya Uss Ne Dehqan Ka



Tilism-e-Zulmat-e-Shab Surah Wan-Noor Se Tora
Andhere Mein Uraya Taj-e-Zar Shama-e-Shabistan Ka



Parha Khawabidgan-e-Dair Par Afsoon-e-Baidari
Barhman Ko Diya Pegham Khursheed-e-Durakhshan Ka



Huwi Baam-e-Haram Par Aa Key Un Goya Moazzan Se
Nahin Khatka Tere Dil Mein Namood-e-Mehr-e-Taban Ka?



Pukari Iss Tarah Deewar-e-Gulshan Par Khare Ho Kar
Chatak O Ghuncha-e-Gul! Tu Moazzan Hai Gulistan Ka



Diya Ye Hukm Sehra Mein Chalo Ae Qafile Walo!
Chamakne Ko Hai Juggnu Ban Ke Har Zarra Byaban Ka



Sooye Gor-e-Ghareeban Jab Gyi Zindon Ki Basti Se
To Yun Boli Nazara Dekh Kar Sheher-e-Khamoshan Ka



Abhi Aram Se Laite Raho, Main Phir Bhi Aun Gi
Sula Dun Gi Jahan Ko, Khawab Se Tum Ko Jagaun Gi

*
