بچہ اور شمع
*
!کيسي حيراني ہے يہ اے طفلک پروانہ خو
شمع کے شعلوں کو گھڑيوں ديکھتا رہتا ہے تو
يہ مري آغوش ميں بيٹھے ہوئے جنبش ہے کيا
روشني سے کيا بغل گيري ہے تيرا مدعا؟
اس نظارے سے ترا ننھا سا دل حيران ہے
يہ کسي ديکھي ہوئي شے کي مگر پہچان ہے
شمع اک شعلہ ہے ليکن تو سراپا نور ہے
آہ! اس محفل ميں يہ عرياں ہے تو مستور ہے
!دست قدرت نے اسے کيا جانے کيوں عرياں کيا
تجھ کو خاک تيرہ کے فانوس ميں پنہاں کيا
نور تيرا چھپ گيا زير نقاب آگہي
ہے غبار ديدہء بينا حجاب آگہي
زندگاني جس کو کہتے ہيں فراموشي ہے يہ
خواب ہے، غفلت ہے، سرمستي ہے، بے ہوشي ہے يہ
محفل قدرت ہے اک دريائے بے پايان حسن
آنکھ اگر ديکھے تو ہر قطرے ميں ہے طوفان حسن
حسن ، کوہستاں کي ہيبت ناک خاموشي ميں ہے
مہر کي ضوگستري، شب کي سيہ پوشي ميں ہے
آسمان صبح کي آئينہ پوشي ميں ہے يہ
شام کي ظلمت، شفق کي گل فرو شي ميں ہے يہ
عظمت ديرينہ کے مٹتے ہوئے آثار ميں
طفلک ناآشنا کي کوشش گفتار ميں
ساکنان صحن گلشن کي ہم آوازي ميں ہے
ننھے ننھے طائروں کي آشياں سازي ميں ہے
چشمہ کہسار ميں ، دريا کي آزادي ميں حسن
شہر ميں، صحرا ميں، ويرانے ميں، آبادي ميں حسن
روح کو ليکن کسي گم گشتہ شے کي ہے ہوس
!ورنہ اس صحرا ميں کيوں نالاں ہے يہ مثل جرس
حسن کے اس عام جلوے ميں بھي يہ بے تاب ہے
زندگي اس کي مثال ماہي بے آب ہے
*
THE CHILD AND THE CANDLE
*
This apparently simple poem is highly charged with sophisticated Tasawwuf and so is very difficult to understand. It is based on the theories of Wahdat al‑Wujud" and Wahdat al Shuhud. The poem, which belongs to the pre-1905 period is based on the former as is apparent from part three. In the poem "Light” means manifestation of God, and "Beauty" means the Existence of God. Consequently, I have written both these words in capitals.
*
O Child with moth-like nature , "How strange that
You keep gazing at the flame of the candle for hours

What is this movement, when you are in my lap?
Are you intending to embrace the light?

Though your tiny heart is surprised at this spectacle
But this is recognition of some object already seen! $1

The candle is but a flame, you are the Light embodied
Ah! In this assembly that is manifest, you are concealed $2

It is not known why the Nature's hand made it manifest!
And concealed you in the dark soil's mantle

Your light has been concealed under the veil of Intellect! $3
The veil of Cognition is a mere mist to the wise eye!

What is called life really a mirage it is
A dream, a swoon, an ecstasy, oblivion it is

The Nature's assembly is the Beauty's boundless ocean
For the discerning eye every drop is the Beauty's storm

Beauty is in the frightening silence of the mountain
In shedding of sun's light, and in night's darkness

It is in the morning sky's mirror-like glitter
In the night's darkness and in the twilight's floridity

It is in the disappearing relics of the old magnificence
In the small child's effort to commence speaking

It is in the harmony of the denizens of the rose-garden
In the nest-building efforts of the tiny little birds

In the mountain stream, in the ocean's freedom is Beauty
In the city, the forest, the wilderness, the habitation is Beauty

The soul but longing for some lost object is
Or else why is it lamenting in wilderness like a bell ?

It is restless even in this general splendor of Beauty
Its life is like a fish out of water
*
1. This is the first hint in the poem that the candle's light is the same light as the Light of God seen by Man on the Primeval Day.

2. Allusion to the manifest glow of the candle in the transparent mantle of glass and the veiled Light of God in the opaque earthen mantle of human body.

3. Allusion to the vision of the Light of God. This and the remaining verses mean that God and His Beauty is present in the multitudes of worldly objects mentioned in those verses. He can be discerned by the discerning eye with the help of Khuda. The Holy Qur'an also teaches us to understand God from the objects of the universe and Man's own self, which is Khuda. The power of Khuda distinguishes Man from and makes him superior to the rest of the creation of God. However, Knowledge or Intellect conceals Khuda and with it the Light of God fades away from Man's eyes. This Light dawns only when Man throws away the earthly mantle of Intellect and activates the Love of God. ‘Allamah Iqbal's works are replete with this thought.

However, a small sample is presented here:

(179) Love is complete Presence, Knowledge complete veil
Knowledge the obvious question, Love the veiled answer

(180) Love is complete Faith! And Faith the gate's opening
Knowledge is a produce of the Book ! Love the Mother of the Book
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/01-47.MP3
*
Kaisi Hairani Hai Ye Ae Tiflak-e-Parwana Khu!
Shama Ke Shaolon Ko Ghariyon Dekhta Rehta Hai Tu



Ye Meri Aghosh Mein Baithe Huwe Junbish Hai Kya
Roshni Se Kya Baghal Geeri Hai Tera Mudda?



Iss Nazare Se Tera Nanha Sa Dil Heeran Hai
Ye Kisi Dekhi Huwi Shay Ki Magar Pehchan Hai



Shama Ek Shaola Hai Lekin Tu Sarapa Noor Hai
Ah! Iss Mehfil Mein Ye Uryan Hai Tu Mastoor Hai



Dast-e-Qudrat Ne Isse Kya Jane Kyun Uryan Kiya!
Tujh Ko Khak-e-Teera Ke Fanoos Mein Pinhan Kiya



Noor Tera Chup Gya Zair-e-Naqab-e-Aaghi
Hai Ghubar-e-Didah-e-Beena Hijab-e-Aaghi



Zindagaani Jis Ko Kehte Hain Faramoshi Hai Ye
Khawab Hai, Ghaflat Hai, Sar Masti Hai, Behoshi Hai Ye



Mehfil-e-Qudrat Hai Ek Darye Be-Payan-e-Husn
Ankh Agar Dekhe To Har Qatre Mein Hai Toofan-e-Husn



Husn, Kohistan Ki Haibatnaak Khamoshi Mein Hai
Mehr Ki Zou Gastri, Shab Ji Siyah Poshi Mein Hai



Asman-e-Subah Ki Aaeena Poshi Mein Hai Ye
Sham Ki Zulmat, Shafaq Ki Gul Faroshi Mein Hai Ye



Azmat-e-Dairina Ke Mitte Huwe Asaar Mein
Tiflak-e-Na Ashna Ki Koshish-e-Guftar Mein



Sakinan-e-Sehan-e-Gulshan Ki Hum Awazi Mein Hai
Nanhe Nanhe Taeeron Ki Ashiyan Saazi Mein Hai



Chashma-e-Kuhsar Mein, Darya Ki Azadi Mein Husn
Shehr Mein, Sehra Mein, Weerane Mein, Abadi Mein Husn



Rooh Ko Lekin Kisi Gum Gashta Shay Ki Hai Hawas
Warna Iss Sehra Mein Kyun Nalan Hai Ye Misl-e-Jaras!



Husn Ke Iss Aam Jalwe Mein Bhiye Betaab Hai
Zindagi Iss Ki Misal-e-Maahi-e-Be Aab Hai
*
