نوائے غم
*
زندگاني ہے مري مثل رباب خاموش
جس کي ہر رنگ کے نغموں سے ہے لبريز آغوش
بربط کون و مکاں جس کي خموشي پہ نثار
جس کے ہر تار ميں ہيں سينکڑوں نغموں کے مزار
محشرستان نوا کا ہے اميں جس کا سکوت
اور منت کش ہنگامہ نہيں جس کا سکوت
آہ! اميد محبت کي بر آئي نہ کبھي
چوٹ مضراب کي اس ساز نے کھائي نہ کبھي
مگر آتي ہے نسيم چمن طور کبھي
سمت گردوں سے ہوائے نفس حور کبھي
چھيڑ آہستہ سے ديتي ہے مرا تار حيات
جس سے ہوتي ہے رہا روح گرفتار حيات
نغمہ ياس کي دھيمي سي صدا اٹھتي ہے
اشک کے قافلے کو بانگ درا اٹھتي ہے
جس طرح رفعت شبنم ہے مذاق رم سے
ميري فطرت کي بلندي ہے نوائے غم سے
*
THE SONG OF GRIEF
*
This short and extremely beautiful poem is an expression of the joy and happiness which one derives from the Love of God. Apparently, the Love of God is a series of trials and tribulations, like any other love. However, the Lover feels some degree of joy and pleasure in his condition of Love. In the same way the Love of God is full of trials and tribulations of the extreme magnitude, but for His Lover they are also sources of joy of the highest order. As God is the Highest and Most Supreme Existence, His Love is the source of trials and tribulations as well as that of joy and happiness of the highest order, which can be felt and appreciated only by those who are so graced by Him. For others it is "lunacy", as love is often called.
*
My life is similar to that of the silent violin
The lap of which is full of all kinds of melodies

The harp of the universe is sacrificed on whose silence
Every string of which is the grave of hundreds of melodies

The silence of which is the custodian of music's perfection
And the silence of which is not obligated to any uproar

Ah ! The hope of my Love was never fulfilled
This instrument was never hit by the plectrum

But sometimes the zephyr of the garden of Tur flows
And sometimes the breeze of Houri’s breath from the sky

Which gently touches the string of my life
And frees the imprisoned soul of my life

The gentle sound of the music of despair rises
The clarion's call for the caravan of tears rises

Just as dew's elegance depends upon the taste for racing
The elegance of my nature depends upon grief's melodies !
*

*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-15.MP3
*
Zindagaani Hai Meri Misl-e-Rubab-e-Khamosh
Jis Ki Har Rang Ke Naghmon Se Hai Labraiz Aghosh



Barbat-e-Kon-o-Makan Jis Ki Khamoshi Pe Nisar
Jis Ke Har Taar Mein Hain Saikrhon Naghmon Ke Mazar



Mehsharistan-e-Nawa Ka Hai Ameen Jis Ka Sukoot
Aur Minnat Kash-e-Hangama Nahin Jis Ka Sukoot



Aah! Umeed Mohabbat Ki Bar Ayi Na Kabhi
Chot Mizrab Ki Iss Saaz Ne Khayi Na Kabhi



Magar Ati Hai Naseem-e-Chaman-e-Toor Kabhi
Simat-e-Gurdoon Se Hawaye Nafas-e-Hoor Kabhi



Chair Ahista Se Deti Hai Mera Taar-e-Hayat
Jis Se Hoti Hai Riha Rooh-e-Graftar-e-Hayat



Naghma-e-Yaas Ki Dheemi Si Sada Uthti Hai
Ashak Ke Qafle Ko Bang-e-Dra Uthti Hai




Jis Tarah Riffat-e-Shabnam Hai Mazaq-e-Ram Se
Meri Fitrat Ki Bulandi Hai Nawaye Gham Se
*
