صقليہ
*
رو لے اب دل کھول کر اے ديدہء خوننابہ بار
وہ نظر آتا ہے تہذيب حجازي کا مزار
تھا يہاں ہنگامہ ان صحرا نشينوں کا کبھي
بحر بازي گاہ تھا جن کے سفينوں کا کبھي
زلزلے جن سے شہنشاہوں کے درباروں ميں تھے
بجليوں کے آشيانے جن کي تلواروں ميں تھے
اک جہان تازہ کا پيغام تھا جن کا ظہور
کھا گئي عصر کہن کو جن کي تيغ ناصبور
مردہ عالم زندہ جن کي شورش قم سے ہوا
آدمي آزاد زنجير توہم سے ہوا
غلغلوں سے جس کے لذت گير اب تک گوش ہے
کيا وہ تکبير اب ہميشہ کے ليے خاموش ہے؟
آہ اے سسلي! سمندرکي ہے تجھ سے آبرو
رہنما کي طرح اس پاني کے صحرا ميں ہے تو
زيب تيرے خال سے رخسار دريا کو رہے
تيري شمعوں سے تسلي بحر پيما کو رہے
ہو سبک چشم مسافر پر ترا منظر مدام
موج رقصاں تيرے ساحل کي چٹانوں پر مدام
تو کبھي اس قوم کي تہذيب کا گہوارہ تھا
حسن عالم سوز جس کا آتش نظارہ تھا
نالہ کش شيراز کا بلبل ہوا بغداد پر
داغ رويا خون کے آنسو جہاں آباد پر
آسماں نے دولت غرناطہ جب برباد کي
ابن بدروں کے دل ناشاد نے فرياد کي
غم نصيب اقبال کو بخشا گيا ماتم ترا
چن ليا تقدير نے وہ دل کہ تھا محرم ترا
ہے ترے آثار ميں پوشيدہ کس کي داستاں
تيرے ساحل کي خموشي ميں ہے انداز بياں
درد اپنا مجھ سے کہہ ، ميں بھي سراپا درد ہوں
جس کي تو منزل تھا ، ميں اس کارواں کي گرد ہوں
رنگ تصوير کہن ميں بھر کے دکھلا دے مجھے
قصہ ايام سلف کا کہہ کے تڑپا دے مجھے
ميں ترا تحفہ سوئے ہندوستاں لے جاؤں گا
خود يہاں روتا ہوں ، اوروں کو وہاں رلوائوں گا
*
THE ISLAND OF SICILY
*
This poem is complementary to the previous one. It resulted from two things. One was ‘Allamah Iqbal's deep first hand knowledge of the apparent and material prosperity and the outward courtesy of the Western people, but their moral and ethical bankruptcy. The second was the Western nations' inherent hatred for and their machinations against the Muslim world, which resulted in the latter's decline. These feelings attained their climax when he reached the Island of Sicily on his return journey to India.

Sicily had been conquered by the Aghlabad Dynasty of Tunisia in the early ninth century and was ruled by them as well as by other Arab dynasties till it was conquered back by the Normans in the second half of the eleventh century. This poem has resulted from the flood of thoughts which must have streamed through his mind on reaching the Island of Sicily. The sight of the island brought back to his mind the Muslim world with its glory in ethical as well as social, economic and political fields. The Muslim world, which at one time was spread over northern Africa, southern Europe, central, southern and south‑eastern Asia and was the cradle of the highest civilization of all times, and in moral and ethical spheres, was the highest power, had crumpled down by his time. This sight must have brought to his mind the whole panorama of the period of Muslim suzerainty in Africa and southern Europe. After the Norman conquest of Sicily the Muslim world and society have experienced constant decline which has continued till today. In contrast with the memory of the past glory must have passed his mind the extremely poor condition of the Muslim world in his time. This reminiscence must have made ‘Allamah Iqbal very painfully sad as is evident from the verses of this poem.

At that time little did ‘Allamah Iqbal know that the Muslim Ummah would have to go through much more afflictions than imagined at that time, till he cried out in 1924:

Rendered cheap like water is the blood of the Muslim
You are agitated as your heart is not aware of the secret

More perturbing than the affliction itself was his life‑long realization which poured out of his afflicted heart in 1935:

What an outrage, extinguished is the Love's fire
The Muslim is no more than a heap of burnt ashes !
*
O blood-dripping eye! Now cry to your heart's content
There you can see the mausoleum of the civilization of Hijaz

This was the rendezvous of those Arab Bedouins once
The ocean was the play ground of whose boats once

Who shook up the audience halls of emperors
Thunderbolts were harbored in whose swords

Whose appearance was the message of birth of a new world
Whose restless sword destroyed the whole ancient world

The dead world with whose "Qum" $1 was infused with life
Man was freed from the chains of superstitious beliefs

The ear is still full of pleasures from whose zeal
Is that Takbar $2 now silenced for ever?

Ah! O Sicily! You are giving dignity to the ocean
You are like a guide post in the water's expanse

May the ocean's cheek ever remain elegant with your mole
May your lights ever remain a comfort for the ocean sailor

May your sight ever remain beautiful to traveler’s eyes
May the wave on your shore's rocks ever remain dancing

You were the cradle of that nation's civilization once
Whose universal beauty was the object for spectacle

The Nightingale of Sharaz $3 was the lamentor on Baghdad
Dagh $4 shed the tears of blood on Jahanabad $5

When the sky destroyed the State of Gharnaèah $6
The unhappy heart of Ibn Badrun $7 lamented

The ill‑fated Iqbal has been conferred mourning for you
Destiny has selected the heart that was your confidante

Whose story is concealed in your relics?
In your shore's silence is a style of speech

Tell me your pathos, I am also embodiment of pathos
I am the dust of the caravan of which you were a stage


Show me the old picture painted again
Make me restless by relating the tale of bygone days

I will take your gift towards India
I myself weep here, and will make others weep there
*
1. This is an allusion to the miracle of S.Isa A.S. by which he could bring the dead to life with the permission of God. The first line of this verse means that just as S. Isa A.S. brought the dead to life the Muslim civilization brought the Europe's dark ages to new life. It is also a reference to the re‑birth of Europe under the influence of the Islamic civilization of Spain and Baghdad. For S. Isa A.S.

2. Takbar.

3. The Nightingale of Sharaz - This is the honorific title of Sheikh Musleh al-Din Sa ‘’adi of Shiraz. This hemistich alludes to Sheikh Sa‘ada’s elegy on the destruction, pillage, mass murders and unprecedented atrocities at the hands of Halaku Khan at the time of invasion of the Tartars on Baghdad in 1258. Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid Khilafah headed by al-Musta‘asam Billah. Sheikh Sa‘ada wrote two allegies, one in Persian and the other in Arabic, of which the first is very famous. The heart rending grief which this allegy cast on Sheikh Sa‘ada can be visualized by the following two verses:

(189) The sky is fully entitled to rain blood on the earth
At the fall of the country of Musta‘asam, Amar al-Mu’minan

(190) O Muhammad ! If you would rise from the ground on the Last Day,
The Last Day has already risen from the ground over creation, rise and see

4. Nawab Mirza Khan Dagh‑

5. Jahanabad‑ This is an abbreviation for "Shahjahanabad" which was the name given to Delhi by the Mughal Emperor Shahjahan after rebuilding it. The allusion refers to the allegy of Dagh on the destruction of Delhi at the time of the First War of Indian Independence in 1857.

6. Gharnaèah‑ This is the Arabic name for the Kingdom of Grenada, established in the southern part of Spain about 1160 and destroyed in 1492, which removed the last vestiges of Muslims from Spain.

7. Abu al‑Qasim `Abd al‑Malik Ibn `Abd Allah al-Hazrama Ibn Badrun ­- He was a Muslim poet. He is known in the literary world through his commentary and critique of the works of Ibn `Abdun (Abu Muhammad `Abd al-Majad Ibn ‘Abdun al‑Fahira) who was an Arab poet and writer of Muslim Spain. Ibn Badrun is more famous as a critique of Ibn ‘Abdun’s “Qasadah” in which he had chronicled the history of Muslim rulers. This book was similar to Firdawsa's "Shah Namah" in Persian, which is very famous, and the recent "Shah Namah-i-Islam" by Hafaz Jalandhara of Indo‑Pakistan during the twentieth century.
*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-24.mp3
*
Ro Le Ab Dil Khol Kar Ae Didah-e-Khunanaba Bar
Woh Nazar Ata Hai Tehzeeb-e-Hijazi Ka Mazar



Tha Yahab Hangama In Sehra Nasheenon Ka Kabhi
Beher Bazi-Gah Tha Jin Ke Safeenon Ka Kabhi



Zalzale Jin Se Shehanshahon Ke Darbaron Mein The
Bijliyon Ke Aashiyane Jin Ki Talwaron Mein The



Ek Jahan-e-Taza Ka Pegham Tha Jin Ka Zahoor
Kha Gyi Asr-e-Kuhan Ko Jin Ki Taegh-e-Na-Saboor



Murda Alam Zinda Jin Ki Sourish-e-Qum Se Huwa
Admi Azad Zanjeer-e-Toham Se Huwa



Ghulghulon Se Jis Ke Lazzat-Geer Ab Tak Gosh Hai
Kya Woh Takbeer Ab Hamasha Ke Liye Khamosh Hai?



Aah Ae Sisli! Samunder Ki Hai Tujh Se Abru
Rehnama Ki Tarah Iss Pani Ke Sehra Mein Hai Tu




Zaib Tere Khal Se Rukhsar-e-Darya Ko Rahe
Teri Shamaon Se Tasalli Beher-Pema Ko Rahe



Ho Subak Chashme-e-Musafir Par Tera Manzar Madaam
Mouj Raqsaan Tere Sahil Ki Chatanon Par Madaam



Tu Kabhi Uss Qoum Ki Tehzeeb Ka Gehwara Tha
Husn-e-Alam Souz Jis Ka Atish-e-Nazzara Tha



Nala-Kash Sheeraz Ka Bulbul Huwa Baghdad Par
Dagh Roya Khoon Ke Ansu Jahan-Abad Par



Asman Ne Doulat-e-Gharnata Jab Barbad Ki
Ibn-e-Badroon Ke Dil-e-Na-Shaad Ne Faryad Ki



Gham Naseeb Iqbal Ko Bakhsa Gya Matam Tera
Chun Liya Taqdeer Ne Woh Dil Ke Tha Mehram Tera



Hai Tere Asaar Mein Poshidah Kis Ki Dastan
Tere Sahil Ki Khamoshi Mein Hai Andaz-e-Byan



Dard Apna Mujh Se Keh, Main Bhi Sarapa Dard Hun
Jis Ki Tu Manzil Tha, Main Uss Karwan Ki Gard Hun



Rang Tasveer-e-Kuhan Mein Bhar Ke Dikhla De Mujhe
Qissa Ayyam-e-Salaf Ka Keh Ke Tarpa De Mujhe



Main Tera Tohfa Sooye Hindustan Le Jaun Ga
Khud Yahan Rota Hun, Auron Ko Wahan Rulaon Ga
*
