يوں تو اے بزم جہاں! دلکش تھے ہنگامے ترے
*
يوں تو اے بزم جہاں! دلکش تھے ہنگامے ترے
اک ذرا افسردگي تيرے تماشائوں ميں تھي
پا گئي آسودگي کوئے محبت ميں وہ خاک
مدتوں آوارہ جو حکمت کے صحرائوں ميں تھي
کس قدر اے مے! تجھے رسم حجاب آئي پسند
پردہ انگور سے نکلي تو مينائوں ميں تھي
حسن کي تاثير پر غالب نہ آ سکتا تھا علم
اتني ناداني جہاں کے سارے دانائوں ميں تھي
ميں نے اے اقبال يورپ ميں اسے ڈھونڈا عبث
بات جو ہندوستاں کے ماہ سيمائوں ميں تھي
*
O WORLDLY CONGREGATION! THOUGH YOUR GATHERINGS WERE ATTRACTIVE
*
This ghazal is on the subject of the controversy between Intellect and Love. The climax is reached in verses 2 and 4. ‘Allamah Iqbal has expressed this thought in many poems, a few are of which are presented below;

(191) Bu `Ala in the Lailah's camel's dust-clouds is lost
Ruma's hand got the curtain of her litter

(192) This dived deeper so as to reach the pearl
That got caught in the whirlpool like mote

(193) In logic I get the smell of immaturity
Its arguments are arguments of immaturity!

(194) The closed doors are opened to me
By a verse of Ruma or Jama
*
O worldly congregation! Though your gatherings were attractive
Some degree of melancholy there was in your spectacles

Finally that dust acquired comfort in Love
Which had been wandering long in Intellect's wilderness

O Wine! How much enamored you were with the custom of concealment
After emerging from grape's veil you were concealed in the decanter

Knowledge could not comprehend the Beauty's effect
So much ignorance prevailed in all the world's sages

O Iqbal! I have searched for it in Europe in vain
The characteristic which was in the beauties of India
*

*
http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/poetry/urdu/bang/audio/02-25-5.MP3
*
Yun To Ae Bazm-e-Jahan! Dilkash The Hangame Tere
Ek Zara Afsudagi Tere Tamashaon Mein Thi


Pa Gyi Aasudgi Kooye Mohabbat Mein Woh Khaak
Muddaton Aawara Jo Hikmat Ke Sehraon Mein Thi


Kis Qadar Ae Mai, Tujhe Rasm-e-Hijab Ayi Pasand
Parda-e-Angoor Se Nikli To Minaon Mein Thi


Husn Ki Taseer Par Ghalib Na Aa Sakta Tha Ilm
Itni Nadani Jahan Ke Sare Danaon Mein Thi


Main Ne Ae Iqbal Yourap Mein Usse Dhoonda Abas
Baat Jo Hindustan Ke Mah Seemaon Mein Thi
*
