طاسین محمد نوحۂ روح ابوجہل در حرم کعبہ
*
سینۂ ما از محمد داغ داغ
از دم او کعبہ را گل شد چراغ
از ہلاک قیصر و کسری سرود
نوجوانان را ز دست ما ربود
ساحر و اندر کلامش ساحری است
این دو حرف لاالہ خود کافری است
تا بساط دین آبا در نورد
با خداوندان ما کرد آنچہ کرد
پاش پاش از ضربتش لات و منات
انتقام از وی بگیر ای کائنات
دل بہ غایب بست و از حاضر گسست
نقش حاضر را فسون او شکست
دیدہ بر غایب فرو بستن خطاست
آنچہ اندر دیدہ می ناید کجاست
پیش غایب سجدہ بردن کوری است
دین نو کور است و کوری دوری است
خم شدن پیش خدای بی جہات
بندہ را ذوقی نبخشد این صلوت

مذہب او قاطع ملک و نسب
از قریش و منکر از فضل عرب
در نگاہ او یکے بالا و پست
با غلام خویش بر یک خوان نشست
قدر احرار عرب نشناختہ
با کلفتان حبش در ساختہ
احمران با اسودان آمیختند
آبروے دودمانی ریختند
این مساوات این مواخات اعجمی است
خوب میدانم کہ سلمان مزدکی است
ابن عبداﷲ فریبش خوردہ است
رستخیزی بر عرب آوردہ است
عترت ہاشم ز خود مہجور گشت
از دو رکعت چشم شان بی نور گشت
اعجمی را اصل عدنانی کجاست
گنگ را گفتار سحبانی کجاست
چشم خاصان عرب گردیدہ کور
بر نیائی ای زھیر از خاک گور
ای تو ما را اندرین صحرا دلیل
بشکن افسون نوای جبرئیل

باز گوی ای سنگ اسود باز گوی
آنچہ دیدیم از محمد باز گوی
ای ہبل ، ای بندہ را پوزش پذیر
خانۂ خود را ز بی کیشان بگیر
گلۂ شان را بہ گرگان کن سبیل
تلخ کن خرمایشان را بر نخیل
صرصری دہ با ہواے بادیہ
’’انھم اعجاز نخل خاویہ‘‘
ای منات ای لات ازین منزل مرو
گر ز منزل میروی از دل مرو
ای ترا اندر دو چشم ما وثاق
مہلتی ، ان کنت ازمعت الفراق‘‘
 

*
TASIN OF MOHAMMED,The Spirit of Abu Jahl Laments in the Sanctuary of the Kaaba
*

*
My breast is riven and anguished by this Mohammed;
his breath has put out the burning lamp of the Kaaba.
He has sung of the destruction of Caesar and Chosroes,
he has stolen away from us our young men.
He is a wizard, and wizardry is in his speech:
these two words "One God" are very unbelief.
So he has rolled up the carpet of our fathers' faith
and has done with our Lord Gods what he has done.
The blow of his fist has scattered Lat and Manat:
take vengeance upon him, you created beings!
He bound his heart to the invisible, broke with the visible,
his incantation shattered the living, present image.
It is wrong to attach the eye to the invisible;
that which comes not into sight-wherever is it?
It is blindness to make prostration to the invisible;
the new religion is blindness, and blindness is remoteness.
To bend double before an undimensioned God
such prayers bring no joy to the worshipper.
His creed cuts through the rulership and lineage
of Koraish, denies the supremacy of the Arabs;
in his eyes lofty and lowly are the same thing
he has sat down at the same table with his slave.
He has not recognized the worth of the noble Arabs
but associated with uncouth Abyssinians;
redskins have been confounded with blackskins,
the honour of tribe and family has been destroyed.
This equality and fraternity are foreign things
I know very well that Salman is a Mazdakite;
The son of Abdullah has been duped by him
and he has brought disaster upon the Arab people.
Hashim's progeny have become estranged one from another,
a couple of prayers have utterly blinded them.
What is alien stock, compared with the Adnani,
what betokens Sahbani speech to the barbarian?
The eyes of the elect of the Arabs have been darkened;
will you not rise up, Zuhair, from the dust of the tomb?
You who are for us a guide through this desert,
shatter the spell of the chant of Gabriel!
Tell again, you Black Stone, now tell again,
tell again what we have suffered through Mohammed!
Hubal, thou who acceptest the excuses of thy servants,
seize back thy temple from the irreligious ones;
expose their flock unto the ravening wolves,
make their dates bitter upon the palm-tree!
Let loose a burning wind on the air of the desert
as if they were stumps of fallen-down palm-trees
O Manat, O Lat, go not forth from this abode,
or if you leave this abode, go not from our hearts!
You who have forever a lodging in our eyes,
tarry a little, if you intend to depart from me.
*

*

*

*