تمہید
*
پیر رومی مرشد روشن ضمیر
کاروان عشق و مستی را امیر
منزلش برتر ز ماہ و آفتاب
خیمہ را از کہکشان سازد طناب
نور قرآن در میان سینہ اش
جام جم شرمندہ از آئینہ اش
از نے آن نی نواز پاکزاد
باز شوری در نھاد من فتاد
گفت ’’جانہا محرم اسرار شد
خاور از خواب گران بیدار شد
جذبہ ہای تازہ او را دادہ اند
بندہای کہنہ را بگشادہ اند
جز تو ای دانای اسرار فرنگ
کس نکو ننشست در نار فرنگ
باش مانند خلیل اﷲ مست
ہر کہن بتخانہ را باید شکست
امتان را زندگی جذب درون
کم نظر این جذب را گوید جنون
ہیچ قومی زیر چرخ لاجورد
بی جنون ذوفنون کاری نکرد
مؤمن از عزم و توکل قاہر است
گر ندارد این دو جوہر کافر است
خیر را او باز میداند ز شر
از نگاہش عالمی زیر و زبر
کوہسار از ضربت او ریز ریز
در گریبانش ھزاران رستخیز
تا می از میخانۂ من خوردہ ئے
کہنگی را از تماشا بردہ ئے
در چمن زی مثل بو مستور و فاش
در میان رنگ پاک از رنگ باش
عصر تو از رمز جان آگاہ نیست
دین او جز حب غیر اﷲ نیست
فلسفی این رمز کم فہمیدہ است
فکر او بر آب و گل پیچیدہ است
دیدہ از قندیل دل روشن نکرد
پس ندید الا کبود و سرخ و زرد
ای خوش آن مردی کہ دل با کس نداد
بند غیر اﷲ را از پا گشاد

سر شیری را نفہمد گاو و میش
جز بہ شیران کم بگو اسرار خویش
با حریف سفلہ نتوان خورد می
گرچہ باشد پادشاہ روم و ری
یوسف ما را اگر گرگے برد
بہ کہ مردی ناکسی او را خرد
اہل دنیا بی تخیل بی قیاس
بوریا بافان اطلس ناشناس
اعجمی مردی چہ خوش شعری سرود
سوزد از تأثیر او جان در وجود

’’نالۂ عاشق بگوش مردم دنیا
بانگ مسلمانی و دیار فرنگ است‘‘

معنی دین و سیاست باز گوی
اہل حق را زین دو حکمت باز گوی
’’غم خور و نان غم افزایان مخور
زانکہ عاقل غم خورد کودک شکر‘‘
 رومی  
خرقہ خود بار است بر دوش فقیر
چون صبا جز بوی گل سامان مگیر
قلزمی با دشت و در پیہم ستیز
شبنمی خود را بہ گلبرگی بریز

سر حق بر مرد حق پوشیدہ نیست
روح مؤمن ہیچ میدانی کہ چیست؟
قطرۂ شبنم کہ از ذوق نمود
عقدۂ خود را بدست خود گشود
از خودی اندر ضمیر خود نشست
رخت خویش از خلوت افلاک بست
رخ سوی دریای بے پایان نکرد
خویشتن را در صدف پنہان نکرد
اندر آغوش سحر یکدم تپید
تا بکام غنچۂ نورس چکید‘‘
*
INTRODUCTION
*

*
The Pir of Rum, murshid with illuminating conscience,
the leader of the caravan of love and ecstasy,
whose station is far above the Moon and the Sun,
for whose tent the Milky Way serves as pegs,
whose heart is effulgent with the light of the Qur'an, 
whose mirror is more revealing than Jamshid's cup.
With his music that musician of Pure lineage
Has thrown my being into tumult once again.
Said he: The people have become aware of the secrets,
the East has awoken from its deep slumber;
destiny has given it new aspirations,
and loosened its age-old chains.
No one, O knower of the secrets of the West,
has experienced the fire of the West better than thee.
Be intoxicated like the Friend of God (Abraham),
and help bring down every idol-temple.
It is ecstasy that imparts life to nations,
though the undiscerning call it madness.
No people under the azure dome of the sky
has ever achieved anything without this ingenious madness.
The believer is strong through his will and his reliance (on God); 
if he lacks these two, he is an unbeliever.
He can distinguish between good and evil
a mere look from him can shake the whole world;
his blow can crush a mountain to pieces ;
and he has thousands of resurrections at his command.
Having drunk wine from my tavern,
you have removed everything old from your vision.
Live in the garden like smell, both hidden and manifest,
live among colours, but be free from colour.
Your age is not aware of the secrets of the spirit:
its creed is nothing but love for the other-than-God.
Little has the philosopher understood this point:
his thought revolves only round matter.
He has not illumined his eyes with the lantern of the heart;
hence he sees nothing but blue, red and yellow.
Fortunate is he who never never gave his heart to any one,
and freed his feet from the chains of servitude to the other-than-God.
 
What it means to be a lion is beyond the ken of cows and buffaloes; 
never reveal your secret except to lions.
One should not drink wine in the company of a churl,
though he may be king of Rum or Rayy.
It is better that our Joseph be taken away by a wolf
than be bought by an unworthy person.
People of the world lack reason and imagination
they are weavers of mat and know nothing about satin.
What a beautiful verse a Persian poet has sung,
Effect of which sets the soul afire:
 
"To the ears of the people of the world, the wailing of the lover
 is like the cry of the adhan in the land of the Franks."
 
Reveal once again the significance of religion and politics,
tell once again the devotees of the Truth what you understand by them.
"Suffer grief (patiently) and do not eat the bread of those who augment grief;
 a wise man suffers grief while a child eats sweets." 
 
To the Faqir, even his patched-up garment is a burden.
Like breeze you should carry nothing except the smell of roses.
Are you an ocean? Then be constantly at war with your environment.
Are you a dew-drop? Then drop yourself gently on a rose-petal.
 
The Divine mystery is not hidden from the man of God;
do you know what is the true nature of a believer's soul?
It is a drop of dew which, out of desire for self-manifestation,
unravelled its own knot with its own hands,
which sat in the depth of its being by dint of selfhood,
which started on its journey from the stillness of the heavens;
which did not turn towards the limitless expanse of the ocean,
nor did it hide itself in an oyster ;
It palpitated in the lap of the morning for a moment
and then dropped into the mouth of the new-born bud.
*

*

*

*