’’در بیان اینکہ تربیت خودی را سہ مراحل است
 مرحلۂ اول را اطاعت و مرحلۂ دوم را ضبط نفس،
 و مرحلہ سوم را نیابت الھی نامیدہ اند‘‘
*
@ ’’مرحلۂ اول اطاعت ‘‘         
خدمت و محنت شعار اشتر است
صبر و استقلال کار اشتر است
گام او در راہ کم غوغا ستی
کاروان را زورق  صحرا ستی
نقش پایش قسمت ہر بیشہ ئی
کم خور و کم خواب و محنت پیشہ ئی
مست زیر بار محمل مے رود
پای کوبان سوی منزل می رود
سر خوش از کیفیت رفتار خویش
در سفر صابر تر از اسوار خویش
تو ہم از بار فرائض سر متاب
بر خوری از ’’عندہ حسن المآب‘‘
در اطاعت کوش ای غفلت شعار
می شود از جبر پیدا اختیار
ناکس از فرمان پذیری کس شود
آتش ار باشد ز طغیان خس شود
ہر کہ تسخیر مہ و پروین کند
خویش را زنجیری آئین کند
باد را زندان گل خوشبو  کند
قید بو را نافہ ے آہو کند
می زند اختر سوی منزل قدم
پیش آئینی سر تسلیم خم
سبزہ بر دین نمو روئیدہ است
پایمال از ترک آن گردیدہ است
لالہ پیھم سوختن قانون او
بر جہد اندر رگ او خون او
قطرہ ہا دریاست از آئین وصل
ذرہ ہا صحراست از آئین وصل
باطن ھر شی ز آئینی قوی
تو چرا غافل ازین سامان روی
باز ای آزاد دستور قدیم
زینت پا کن ھمان زنجیر سیم
شکوہ سنج سختی آئین مشو
از حدود مصطفی بیرون مرو
@ ’’مرحلہ دوم ضبط نفس‘‘
نفس تو مثل شتر خود پرور است
خود پرست و خود سوار و خود سر است
مرد شو آور زمام او بکف
تا شوی گوہر اگر باشی خزف
ہر کہ بر خود نیست فرمانش روان
می شود فرمان پذیر از دیگران
طرح تعمیر تو از گل ریختند
با محبت خوف را آمیختند
خوف دنیا ، خوف عقبی ، خوف جان
خوف آلام زمین و آسمان
حب مال و دولت و حب وطن
حب خویش و اقربا و حب زن
امتزاج ماء و طین تن پرور است
کشتہ ی فحشا ھلاک منکر است
تا عصائی لا الہ داری بدست
ہر طلسم خوف را خواہی شکست
ہر کہ حق باشد چو جان اندر تنش
خم نگردد پیش باطل گردنش
خوف را در سنیۂ او راہ نیست
خاطرش مرعوب غیر اللہ نیست
ہر کہ در اقلیم لا آباد شد
فارغ از بند زن و اولاد شد
می کند از  ماسوی قطع نظر
می نہد ساطور بر حلق پسر
با یکی مثل ہجوم لشکر است
جان بچشم او ز باد ارزان تر است
لا الہ باشد صدف گوہر نماز
قلب مسلم را حج اصغر نماز
در کف مسلم مثال خنجر است
قاتل فحشا و بغی و منکر است
روزہ بر جوع و عطش شبخون زند
خیبر تن پرورے را بشکند
مؤمنان را فطرت افروز است حج
ہجرت آموز و وطن سوزست حج
طاعتی سرمایہ ی جمعیتی
ربط اوراق کتاب ملتی
حب دولت را فنا سازد زکوة
ہم مساوات آشنا سازد زکوة
دل ز ’’حتی تنفقوا‘‘ محکم کند
زر فزاید الفت زر کم کند
این ہمہ اسباب استحکام تست
پختہ ی محکم اگر اسلام تست
اھل قوت شو ز ورد یًا قوی‘‘
تا سوار اشتر خاکی شوے
@ ’’مرحلہ سوم نیابت الھی‘‘
گر شتر بانی جہانبانی کنی
زیب سر تاج سلیمانی کنی
تا جہان باشد جہان آرا شوی
تاجدار ملک ’’لایبلی‘‘ شوی
نایب حق در جہان بودن خوش است
بر عناصر حکمران بودن خوش است
نایب حق ہمچو جان عالم است
ہستی او ظل اسم اعظم است
از رموز جزو و کل آگہ بود
در جہان قائم بامراللہ بود
خیمہ چون در وسعت عالم زند
این بساط کہنہ را برھم زند
فطرتش معمور و می خواہد نمود
عالمی دیگر بیارد در وجود
صد جہان مثل جہان جزو وکل
روید از کشت خیال او چو گل
پختہ سازد فطرت ہر خام را
از حرم بیرون کند اصنام را
نغمہ زا تار دل از مضراب او
بہر حق بیداری او خواب او
شیب را آموزد آہنگ شباب
می دہد ہر چیز را رنگ شباب
نوع انسان را بشیر و ہم نذیر
ہم سپاہی ہم سپہگر ہم امیر
مدعای ’’علم الاسما‘‘ ستی
سر ’’سبحان الذی اسرا‘‘ ستی
از عصا دست سفیدش محکم است
قدرت کامل بعلمش توأم است
چون عنا گیرد بدست آن شہسوار
تیز تر گردد سمند روزگار
خشک سازد ہیبت او نیل را
می برد از مصر اسرائیل را
از قم او خیزد اندر گور تن 
مردہ جانہا چون صنوبر در چمن 
ذات او توجیہ ذات عالم است
از جلال او نجات عالم است
ذرہ خورشید آشنا از سایہ اش
قیمت ہستی گران از مایہ اش
زندگی بخشد ز اعجاز عمل
می کند تجدید انداز عمل
جلوہ ہا خیزد ز نقش پای او
صد کلیم آوارہ ی سینای او
زندگے را می کند تفسیر نو
می دہد این خواب را تعبیر نو
ہستئی مکنون او راز حیات
نغمہ ی نشیندہ ی ساز حیات
طبع مضمون بند فطرت خون شود
تا دو بیت ذات او موزون شود
مشت خاک ما سر گردون رسید
زین غبار آن شہسوار آید پدید
خفتہ در خاکستر امروز ما
شعلہ  ی فردای عالم سوز ما
غنچہ ی ما گلستان در دامن است
چشم ما از صبح فردا روشن است
ای سوار اشہب دوران بیا
ای فروغ دیدہ ی امکان بیا
رونق ہنگامہ ی ایجاد شو
در سواد دیدہ ھا آباد شو
شورش اقوام را خاموش کن
نغمہ ی خود را بہشت گوش کن
خیز و قانون اخوت ساز دہ
جام صہبای محبت باز دہ 
باز در عالم بیار ایام صلح
جنگجویان را بدہ پیغام صلح
نوع انسان مزرع و تو حاصلی
کاروان زندگے را منزلی
ریخت از جور خزان برگ شجر
چون بھاران بر ریاض ما گذر
سجدہ ہای طفلک و برنا و پیر
از جبین شرمسار ما بگیر
از وجود تو سرافرازیم ما
پس بسوز این جہان سازیم ما
 

*
SHOWING THAT THE EDUCATION OF THE SELF HAS THREE STAGES: OBEDIENCE, SELF-CONTROL, AND DIVINE VICEGERENCE.
*

*
@ 1. OBEDIENCE

SERVICE and toil are traits of the camel,
Patience and perseverance are ways of the camel.
Noiselessly he steps along the sandy track,
He is -the ship of those who voyage in the desert.
Every thicket knows the print of his foot:
He eats seldom, sleeps little, and is inured to toil.
He carries rider, baggage, and litter:
He trots on and on to the journey's end,
Rejoicing in his speed,
More patient in travel than his rider, -
Thou, too, do not refuse the burden of Duty:
So wilt thou enjoy the best dwellingplace, which is with God.
Endeavour to obey, O heedless one!
Liberty is the fruit of compulsion.
By obedience the man of no worth is made worthy;
By disobedience his fire is turned to ashes.
Whoso would master the sun and stars,
Let him make himself a prisoner of Law!
The air becomes fragrant when it is imprisoned in the flower-bud;
The perfume become musk when it is confined in the -navel of the muskdeer.
The star moves towards its goal
With head bowed in surrender to a law.
The grass springs up in obedience to the law of growth:
When it abandons that, it is trodden underfoot.
To burn unceasingly is the law of the tulip.
And so the blood leaps in its veins
Drops of water become a sea by the law of union,
And grains of sand became a Sahara.
Since Law makes everything strong within,
Why dost thou neglect this source of strength?
O thou that art emancipated from the old Custom. $1
Adorn thy feet once more with the same fine silver chain!
Do not complain of the hardness of the Law.
Do not transgress the statutes of Muhammad!
@ 2. SELF-CONTROL

Thy soul cares only for itself, like the camel:
It is self-conceited, self-governed, and self-willed.
Be a man, get its halter into thine hand,
That thou mayst become a pearl albeit thou art a potter's vessel.
He that does not command himself
Becomes a receiver of commands from others.
When they moulded thee of clay,
Love and fear were mingled in thy making:
Fear of this world and of the world to come, fear of death,
Fear of all the pains of earth and heaven;
Love of riches and power, love of country,
Love of self and kindred and wife.
Man, in whom clay is mixed with water, is fond of ease,
Devoted to wickedness and enamoured of evil.
So long as thou hold'st the staff of "There is no god but He," $2
Thou wilt break every spell of fear.
One to whom God is as the soul in his body,
His neck is not bowed before vanity.
Fear finds no way into his bosom,
heart is afraid of none but Allah.
Whoso dwells in the world of Negation. $3
Is freed from the bonds of wife and child.
He withdraws his gaze from all except God
And lays the knife to the throat of his son. $4
Though single, he is like a host in onset:
Life is cheaper in his eyes than wind.
The profession of Faith is the shell, and prayer is the pearl within it:
The Moselm's heart deems prayer a lesser pilgrimage. $5
In the Muslim's hand prayer is like a dagger.
Killing sin and forwardness and wrong.
Fasting makes an assault upon hunger and thirst.
And breaches the citadel of sensuality.
The pilgrimage enlightens the soul of the Faithful:
It teaches separation from one's home and destroys attachment to one's native land;
It is an act of devotion in which all feel themselves to be one,
It binds together the leaves of the book of religion,
Almsgiving causes love of riches to pass away
And makes equality familiar;
It fortifies the heart with righteousness, $6
It increases wealth and diminishes fondness for wealth.
All this is a means of strengthening thee:
Thou art impregnable, if thy Islam be strong.
Draw might from the litany "O Almighty One!"
That thou mayst ride the camel of thy body. $7
@ 3. DIVINE VICEGERENCY $8

If thou canst rule thy camel, thou wilt rule the world.
And wear on thine head the crown of Solomon.
Thou wilt be the glory of the world whilst the world lasts,
And thou wilt reign in the kingdom incorruptible.
'Tin sweet to be God's vicegerent in the world
And -exercise sway over the elements.
God's vicegerent is as the soul of the universe,
His being is the shadow of the Greatest Name.
He knows the mysteries of part and whole,
He executes the command of Allah in the world.
When he pitches his tent in the wide I world.
He rolls up this ancient carpet $9
His genius abounds with life and desires to manifest itself:
He will bring another world into existence.
A hundred worlds like this world of parts and wholes
Spring up, like roses, from the seed of his imagination.
He makes every raw nature ripe,
He puts the idols out of the sanctuary.
Heart-strings give forth music at his touch.
He wakes and sleeps for God alone.
He teaches age the melody of youth
And endows every thing with the radiance of youth.
To the human race he brings both a glad message and a warning,
He comes both as a soldier and as a marshal and prince.
He is the final cause of "God taught Adam the names of all things," $10
He is the inmost sense of "Glory to Him that transported His servant by night." $11
His white hand is strengthened by the staff. $12
His knowledge is twined with the power of a perfect man.
When that bold- cavalier seizes the reins,
The steed of Time gallops faster.
His awful mien makes the Red Sea dry,
He leads lsrael out of Egypt.
At his cry, "Arise," the dead spirits
Rise in their bodily tomb, like pines in the field.
His person is an atonement for all the world,
By his grandeur the world is saved. $13
His protecting shadow makes the mote familiar with the sun,
His rich substance makes precious all that exists,
He bestows life by his miraculous actions,
He renovates old ways of life.
Splendid visions rise from the print of his foot.
Many a Moses is entranced by his Sinai.
He gives a new explanation of Life,
A new interpretation of this dream.
His hidden life is being Life's mystery.
The unheard music of Life's harp.
Nature travels in blood for generations.
To compose the harmony of his personality.
Our handful of earth has reach the zenith,
For that champion will come forth from this dust
There sleeps amidst the ashes, of our To-day
The flame of a world consuming morrow.
Our bed enfolds a garden of roses,
Our eyes are bright with to-morrow's dawn.
Appear, O rider of Destiny!
Appear, O light of the dark realm of Change
Illumine the scene of existence.
Dwell in the blackness of our eyes!
Silence the noise of the nations,
Imparadise our ears with thy music!
Arise and tune the harp of brotherhood,
Give us back the cup of the wine of love !
Bring once more days of peace to the world,
Give a message of peace to them that seek battle !
Mankind are the cornfield and thou the harvest,
Thou art the goal of Life's caravan.
The leaves are scattered by Autumn's fury
Oh, do thou pass over our gardens as the Spring!
Receive from our downcast brows
The homage of little children and of young men and old!
It is to thee that we owe our dignity
And silently undergo the pains of life.
*
1. The religious law of Islam

2. The first article of the Mohammedan creed.

3. i.e. denies every object of worship except Allah

4. Like Abraham when he was about to sacrific Isaace. of (as Muslims generally believe) Ishmael.

5. The lesser pilgrimage (umra) in not obligatory like the greater pilgrimage (haij)

6. The original quotes part of a verse in the Koran (ch. 3. v. 86), where it is said, "Ye shall never attain unto righteousness until ye. give in aims of that which ye love."

7. i.e. overcome the lusts of the flash.

8. Here Iqbal interprets in his own way the Sufi doctrine of the Insan al-kamil or Perfect Man, which teaches that every man is potentially a microcosm and that when be has become spiritually perfect. all the Divine attributes are displayed by him, so that as saint prophet he is the God-man. the representative and vicegerent of God on earth.

9. i.e. his appearance marks the end of an epoch.

10. Koran ch. 2. v. 29. The Ideal Man is the final cause of creation.

11. Koran. ch. 17. v. 1, referring to the Ascension on the Prophet

12. For the white hand (of Moses) of Koran. ch. 7. v. 105. ch. 26. v. 32. and Exodus, ch. 4, v.6.

13. These four lives may allude to Jesus, regarded as a type of the Perfect Man.
*

*

*