’’حکایت نوجوانی از مرو کہ پیش حضرت سید مخدوم علی ھجویری رحمة اﷲ علیہ آمدہ از ستم اعدا فریاد کرد‘‘
*
سید ہجویر مخدوم امم
مرقد او پیر سنجر را حرم
بند ہای کوہسار آسان گسیخت
در زمین ہند تخم سجدہ ریخت
عہد فاروق از جمالش تازہ شد
حق ز حرف او بلند آوازہ شد
پاسبان عزت ام الکتاب
از نگاہش خانہ ی باطل خراب
خاک پنجاب از دم او زندہ گشت
صبح ما از مہر او تابندہ گشت
عاشق و ھم قاصد طیار عشق
از جبینش آشکار اسرار عشق
داستانی از کمالش سر کنم 
گلشنی در غنچہ ئی مضمر کنم
نوجوانی قامتش بالا چو سرو
وارد لاہور شد از شہر مرو
رفت پیش سید والا جناب 
تا رباید ظلمتش را آفتاب
گفت ’’محصور صف اعداستم
درمیان سنگہا میناستم
با من آموز ای شہ گردون مکان 
زندگی کردن میان دشمنان‘‘
پیر دانائی کہ در ذاتش جمال
بستہ پیمان محبت با جلال
گفت ’’ای نامحرم از راز حیات
غافل از انجام و آغاز حیات
فارغ از اندیشہ ی اغیار شو
قوت خوابیدہ ئی بیدار شو
سنگ چون بر خود گمان شیشہ کرد
شیشہ گردید و شکستن پیشہ کرد
ناتوان خود را اگر رہرو شمرد
نقد جان خویش با رہزن سپرد
تا کجا خود را شماری ماء و طین
از گل خود شعلہ ی طور آفرین
با عزیزان سرگران بودن چرا
شکوہ سنج دشمنان بودن چرا
راست می گویم عدو ہم یار تست
ہستی او رونق بازار تست
ہر کہ دانای مقامات خودی است
فضل حق داند اگر دشمن قوی است
کشت انسان را عدو باشد سحاب
ممکناتش را برانگیزد ز خواب
سنگ رہ آبست اگر ہمت قویست
سیل را پست و بلند جادہ چیست؟
سنگ رہ گردد فسان تیغ عزم
قطع منزل امتحان تیغ عزم
مثل حیوان خوردن ، آسودن چسود
گر بخود محکم نہ ئے بودن چسود
خویش را چون از خودی محکم کنی
تو اگر خواہی جہان برھم کنی
گر فنا خواہی ز خود آزاد شو
گر بقا خواہی بخود آباد شو
چیست مردن از خودی غافل شدن
تو چہ پنداری فراق جان و تن
در خودی کن صورت یوسف ، مقام
از اسیری تا شہنشاہی خرام
از خودی اندیش و مرد کار شو
مرد حق شو حامل اسرار شو
شرح راز از داستانہا می کنم
غنچہ از زور نفس وا می کنم
’’خوشتر آن باشد کہ سر دلبران
گفتہ آید در حدیث دیگران‘‘ 
 

*
STORY OF A YOUNG MAN OF MERV WHO CAME TO THE SAINT ALI HAJWIRI (GOD HAVE MERCY ON HIM!) AND  COMPLAINED THAT HE WAS OPPRESSED BY HIS ENEMIES.
*

*
THE saint of Hajwir was venerated by the peoples,
And Pir-i-Sanjar visited his tomb as a pilgrim, $1
With ease he broke down the mountain barriers
And sowed the seed of Islam in India.
The age of Omar was restored by his godliness.
The fame of the Truth was exalted by his words.
He was a guardian of the honour of the Koran.
The house of Falsehood fell in ruins at his gaze.
The dust of the Punjab was brought to life by his breath,
Our dawn was made splendid by his sun
He was a lover, and withal, a courier of Love:
The secrets of Love shone forth from his brow.
I will tell a story of his perfection
And enclose a whole rose-bed in a single bud.
A young man, cypress-tall,
Came from the town of Merv to Lahore.
He went to see the venerable saint,
That the sun might dispth is darkness.
"I am hammed in," he said, "by foes;
I am as a glass in the midst of stones.
Do thou teach me, O sire of heavenly rank,
How to lead my life amongst enemies!"
The wise Director, in whose nature
Love had allied beauty with majesty,
Answered: "Thou art unread in Life's lore,
Careless of its end and its beginning.
Be without fear of others!
Thou art a sleeping force: awake!
When the stone thought itself to be glass,
It became glass and got into the way of breaking.
If the traveller thinks himself weak,
He delivers his soul unto the brigand.
How long wilt thou regard thyself as water and clay?
Create from thy clay a flaming Sinai!
Why be angry with mighty men?
Why complain of enemies?
I will declare the truth: thine enemy is thy friend:
His existence crowns thee with glory.
Whosoever knows the states of the Self
Considers a powerful enemy to be a blessing from God.
To the seed of Man the enemy is -as a rain-cloud:
He awakens its potentialities.
If thy spirit be strong, the stones in thy way are as water:
What wrecks the torrent of the ups and downs of the road?
The sword of resolution is whetted by the stones in the way'
And put to proof by traversing stage after stage.
What is the use of eating and sleeping like a beast?
What is the use of being, unless thou have strength in thyself?
When thou mak'st thyself strong with Self,
Thou wilt destroy the world at thy pleasure.
If thou wouldst pass away, become free of Self
If thou wouldst live, become full of Self ! $2
Who is death? To become oblivious to Self.
Why imagine that it is the parting of soul and body?
Abide in Self, like Joseph?
Advance from captivity to empire!
Think of Self and be a man of action
Be a man of God, bear mysteries within!" $3
I will explain the matter by means of stories,
I will open the bud by the power of my breath.
"'Tis better that a lover's secret
Should be told by the lips of others.'"
*
1. Hajwiri author of the oldest Persian treatise on Sufism, was a native of Ghazna in Afghanistan. He died at Lahore about A D. 1072 Pir-i-Sanjar is the renowned saint, Mu'inuddin, head of the Chishti order of dervishes, who died in A D. 1235 at Ajmir.,

2. These lines correct the Sufi doctrine that means of Passing away from individuality the mystic attains to everlasting life in God.

3. i.e., allegorically. This verse occurs in the Masnavi.
*

*

*